LIVING
Nonviolent
Communication
Practical Tools 
to
 Connect
and
 Communicate Skillfully
in
 Every Situation
M
ARSHALL
R
OSENBERG, PhD
 
C
ONTENTS
 
A Brief Introduction to Nonviolent Communication
1
 
W
E
 C
AN
 W
ORK
 I
T
 O
UT
 
Resolving Conflicts Peacefully and Powerfully
2
 
B
EING
 M
E
, L
OVING
 Y
OU
 
A Practical Guide to Extraordinary Relationships
3
 
G
ETTING
 P
AST THE
 P
AIN
 B
ETWEEN
 U
S
 
Healing and Reconciliation without Compromise
4
 
T
HE
 S
URPRISING
 P
URPOSE OF
 A
NGER
 
Beyond Anger Management—Finding the Gift
5
 
R
AISING
 C
HILDREN
 C
OMPASSIONATELY
 
Parenting the Nonviolent Communication Way
6
 
P
RACTICAL
 S
PIRITUALITY
 
Reflections on the Spiritual Basis of Nonviolent Communication
R
ECOMMENDED
 R
EADING
A
BOUT THE
 C
ENTER FOR
 N
ONVIOLENT
 C
OMMUNICATION
A
BOUT THE
 A
UTHORA
DDITIONAL
 P
RAISE
 
FOR
M
ARSHALL
 R
OSENBERG
, P
H
D
 
“We should all be grateful to Marshall Rosenberg. He provides us with the most
effective tools to foster health and relationships. Nonviolent Communication
connects soul to soul, creating a lot of healing and helps us express honestly
from the heart what are people doing that is or is not in harmony with our needs.
NVC is the missing element in what we do.”
—Deepak Chopra
,
author of 
Ageless Body, Timeless Mind
 
“Dr. Rosenberg has brought the simplicity of successful communication into the
foreground. No matter what issue you’re facing, his strategies for
communicating with others will set you up to win every time.”
—Anthony Robbins
, 
author of 
Awaken the Giant Within 
and 
Unlimited Power
 
“Written with a profound level of clarity and compassion known only to those
who practice what they preach, Marshall’s 
Living Nonviolent Communication
opens us to give our heart’s willing consent to communicate in ways that foster
authentic trust and intimate connection both with ourselves and in all forms of
relationship.”
—Michael Bernard Beckwith
, 
author of 
Life Visioning: A Transformative Process
for Activating Your Unique Gifts and Highest Potential
 A B
RIEF
 I
NTRODUCTION
 
TO
N
ONVIOLENT
 C
OMMUNICATION
 
N
onviolent Communication, or NVC, is a powerful model of communication,
but it goes far beyond that. It is a way of being, thinking, and living in the world.
Its purpose is to inspire heartfelt connections between ourselves and other people
—connections that allow everyone’s needs to be met through compassionate
giving. It inspires us and others to give from the heart. It also helps us connect to
our inner divinity and to what is alive in us moment to moment.
We could say that NVC is a language of compassion, but it is really a
language of life in which compassion comes naturally. The model shows us how
to express what is alive in us and to see what is alive in other people. Once we
get clear about what is alive in us, we can look at what we can do to enrich that
life.
Nonviolent Communication evolved out of an intense interest I had in two
questions. First, I wanted to better understand what happens to human beings
that leads some of us to behave violently and exploitatively. And second, I
wanted to better understand what kind of education serves our attempts to
remain compassionate—which I believe is our nature— even when others are
behaving violently or exploitatively. The theory that has been around for many
centuries says that violence and exploitation happen because people are innately
evil, selfish, or violent. But I have seen people who aren’t like that; I have seen
many people who enjoy contributing to one another’s well-being. So, I wondered
why some people seem to enjoy other people’s suffering, while other people are
just the opposite.
Some Basic Feelings We All Have
Feelings When Needs
Are Fulfilled
Feelings When Needs
Are Not Fulfilled
Amazed
Angry
Comfortable
Annoyed
Confident
ConcernedEager
Confused
Energetic
Disappointed
Fulfilled
Discouraged
Glad
Distressed
Hopeful
Embarrassed
Inspired
Frustrated
Intrigued
Helpless
Joyous
Hopeless
Moved
Impatient
Optimistic
Irritated
Proud
Lonely
Relieved
Nervous
Stimulated
Overwhelmed
Surprised
Puzzled
Thankful
Reluctant
Touched
Sad
Trustful
Uncomfortable
In my exploration of these two questions, I found that the following three
factors are very important in understanding why some of us respond violently
and some of us respond compassionately in similar situations:
 
• The language
that we have been educated to use
 
• How we have been taught to think and
communicate
 
• The specific strategies we have learned to influence others and
ourselves
Some Basic Needs We All Have
 
 
Autonomy
Choosing one’s dreams, goals,
 and values
Choosing one’s plan for fulfilling
 thoses dreams, goals, and values
 
 
Celebration
Celebrating the creation of life
 and dreams fulfilled
Celebrating losses of loved ones,
 dreams, and so on (mourning)
IntegrityAuthenticity
Meaning
Creativity
Self-worth
 
 
 
 
Interdependence
Acceptance
Honesty (the empowering honesty
 that enables us to learn from
 our limitations)
Appreciation
 
Closeness
Love
Community
Reassurance
Consideration
Respect
Contributing to the enrichment of life
 (exercising one’s power by giving
 that which contributes to life)
Support
Trust
Emotional safety
Understanding
Empathy
Warmth
 
 
Physical Nurturance
Air
Rest
Food
Sexual expression
Movement and exercise
Shelter
Protection from life-threatening forms
 of life, such as viruses, bacteria,
 insects, predator y animals, and so on
Touch
Water
 
 
Play
Fun
Laughter
 
 
Spiritual Communion
Beauty
Order
Harmony
Peace
Inspiration
 Because these three factors play a large role in determining whether we are able
to respond compassionately or violently in situations, I have integrated the type
of language, the kinds of thinking, and the forms of communication that
strengthen our ability to willingly contribute to our own well-being and the well-
being of others into this process that I call Nonviolent Communication.
The NVC process shows us how to nakedly express how we are and what is
alive in us—without any criticism and without any analysis of others that implies
wrongness. The process is based on the assumption that anything that people
hear from us that sounds like an analysis or a criticism, or that implies
wrongness on their part, prevents us from connecting with them in a way that
allows everyone to contribute to one another’s well-being. This approach to
communication emphasizes compassion—rather than fear, guilt, shame, blame,
coercion, or threat of punishment—as the motivation for action. In other words,
it is about getting what we want for reasons that we will not regret later. Part of
the process is to say clearly, without analysis, criticism, or blame, what is alive
in us. Another part is to say clearly what would make life more wonderful for us
and to present this information to others as requests and not as demands.
Nonviolent Communication focuses attention on whether people’s needs are
being fulfilled, and if they’re not on what can be done to fulfill these needs. (See
the introduction for the charts “Some Basic Feelings We All Have” and “Some
Basic Needs We All Have.”) It shows us how to express ourselves in ways that
increase the likelihood that others will willingly contribute to our well-being. It
also shows us how to receive the messages of others in ways that will increase
the likelihood that we will willingly contribute to their well-being.
My hope is that the material in this book will help you communicate to others
using this language of life and will show you how to hear this same quality of
communication in the messages of others, regardless of how they speak.
 
 
 
The Four-Part Nonviolent Communication Process
Clearly expressing how I am
without blaming or criticizing
Empathically receiving how you are
without hearing blame or criticism
1. OBSERVATION
What I observe (see, hear,
remember, imagine, free from
my evaluations) that does or does
not contribute to my well-being:
What you observe (see, hear, remember,
imagine, free from your evaluations) that
does or does not contribute to your well-
being: 
“When you see/hear . . .” 
(Sometimes“When I (see, hear) . . .”
unspoken when offering empathy.)
2. FEELINGS
How I feel (emotion or sensation
rather than thought) in relation to
what I observe: 
“I feel . . .”
How you feel (emotion or sensation rather
than thought) in relation to what you observe:
“You feel . . .”
3. NEEDS
What I need or value (rather than
a preference or a specific action)
that causes my feelings:
“because I need/value . . .”
What you need or value (rather than a
preference or a specific action) that causes
your feelings: 
“because you need/value . . .”
 
Clearly requesting that which
would enrich my life without
demanding
Empathically receiving that which would
enrich your life without hearing any
demand
4. REQUESTS
The concrete actions I would like
taken: 
“Would you be willing to .
. . ?”
The concrete actions you would like taken:
“Would you like . . . ?” 
(Sometimes unspoken
when offering empathy.)
 1
 
W
E
 C
AN
 W
ORK
 I
T
 O
UT
Resolving Conflicts Peacefully and Powerfully
 
F
or more than forty years, I’ve mediated a wide variety of conflicts between
parents and children, husbands and wives, management and workers,
Palestinians and Israelis, Serbians and Croatians, and warring groups in Sierra
Leone, Nigeria, Burundi, Sri Lanka, and Rwanda. What I’ve learned from
dealing with conflicts at all these levels is that it is possible to resolve conflicts
peacefully and to everyone’s satisfaction. The likelihood of conflicts being
resolved in this fulfilling way is significantly increased if a certain quality of
human connection can be established between the parties in conflict.
I’ve developed a process called Nonviolent Communication (NVC), which
consists of thought and communication skills that empower us to connect
compassionately with others and ourselves. My colleagues and I are extremely
pleased with the many different ways that people are using NVC in their
personal lives, work settings, and political activities.
In the following pages, I describe how the Nonviolent Communication
process supports efforts to resolve conflicts peacefully. The process can be used
either when we ourselves are directly involved in conflict or when we are
mediating the conflicts of others.
When I am called into a conflict resolution, I begin by guiding the participants
to find a caring and respectful quality of connection among themselves. Only
after this connection is present do I engage them in a search for strategies to
resolve the conflict. At that time, we do not look for 
compromise
; rather, we seek
to resolve the conflict to everyone’s complete satisfaction. To practice this
process of conflict resolution, we must completely abandon the goal of 
getting
people to do what we want. 
Instead, we focus on creating the conditions whereby
everyone’s needs will be met.To further clarify this difference in focus (between getting what we want and
getting what everyone wants), let’s imagine that someone is behaving in a way
that’s not fulfilling a need of ours, and we make a request that the person behave
differently. In my experience, that person will resist what we request if they see
us as only interested in getting our own needs met and if they don’t trust that we
are equally concerned with meeting 
their 
needs. Genuine cooperation is inspired
when participants trust that their own needs and values will be respectfully
addressed. The Nonviolent Communication process is based on respectful
practices that foster genuine cooperation.
USING NONVIOLENT COMMUNICATION TO RESOLVE
CONFLICTS
The Nonviolent Communication practices that support conflict resolution
involve
 1. expressing our own needs;
 2. sensing the needs of others, regardless of how others are expressing
themselves;
 3. checking to see whether needs are accurately being received;
 4. providing the empathy people need in order to hear the needs of others; and
 5. translating proposed solutions or strategies into positive action language.
Defining and Expressing Needs (Needs Are Not Strategies)
It has been my experience that if we keep our focus on needs, our conflicts tend
toward a mutually satisfactory resolution. When keeping our focus on needs, we
express our own needs, clearly understand the needs of others, and avoid any
language that implies wrongness of the other party. On page ix, you can see a list
of the basic human needs we all share.
Unfortunately, I’ve found that very few people are literate in expressing their
needs. Instead they have been trained to criticize, insult, and otherwise
communicate in ways that create distance among people. As a result, even in
conflicts for which resolutions exist, resolutions are not found. Instead of both
parties expressing their own needs and understanding the needs of the other
party, both sides play the game of who’s right. That game is more likely to end in
various forms of verbal, psychological, or physical violence than in a peaceful
resolution of differences.
Because needs are such a vital component of this approach to conflictresolution, I’d like to clarify what I’m referring to when I talk about needs.
Needs, 
as I use the term, can be thought of as resources that life requires in order
to sustain itself. For example, our physical well-being depends on our needs for
air, water, rest, and food being fulfilled. Our psychological and spiritual well-
being is enhanced when our needs for understanding, support, honesty, and
meaning are fulfilled.
According to this definition of 
needs, 
regardless of our gender, educational
level, religious beliefs, or nationality, all human beings have the same needs.
What differs from person to person is the strategy for fulfilling needs. I’ve found
that it facilitates conflict resolution to keep our needs separate from the strategies
that might fulfill them.
One guideline for separating needs from strategies is to keep in mind that
needs contain no reference to specific people taking specific action. In contrast,
effective strategies—or what are more commonly referred to as wants, requests,
desires, and “solutions”—
do 
refer to specific people taking specific actions. An
exchange between a husband and wife who had just about given up on their
marriage will clarify this important difference between needs and strategies.
I asked the husband what needs of his were not being fulfilled in the marriage.
He responded, “I need to get out of this relationship.” Since he was talking about
a specific person (himself) taking specific action (leaving the marriage), he was
not expressing a need as I define it. Instead he was telling me a strategy that he
was thinking of using. I pointed this out to him and suggested that we delay
talking about strategies until we had really clarified both his needs and the needs
of his wife. When they were able to clarify their needs, both saw that strategies
other than ending the relationship could meet their needs. And I’m pleased to say
that in the two years since that time, they’ve developed a relationship within the
marriage that is very satisfactory to both.
Many people find it difficult to express needs. This lack of “need literacy”
creates problems when people want to resolve conflicts. As an example, I would
like to tell you about a husband and wife whose attempts to resolve conflicts led
them to physical violence.
I had been working in the husband’s workplace, offering some training. At the
end of the training, the husband asked whether he could talk to me privately. He
tearfully expressed the situation between his wife and himself and asked if I
would meet with them to support them in resolving some of their conflicts. The
wife agreed, and so I met with them that evening.
I began by saying, “I’m aware that you’re both in a lot of pain. I would
suggest that we begin with each of you expressing whatever needs of yours are
not being fulfilled in the relationship. Once you understand one another’s needs,I’m confident we can explore some strategies to meet those needs.” What I was
asking them required a literacy of expressing needs and an ability to understand
one another’s needs.
Unfortunately, they weren’t able to do as I suggested. They didn’t have the
literacy. Instead of expressing his needs, the husband said, “The problem with
you is that you’re totally insensitive to my needs.” Immediately his wife
responded by saying, “That’s typical of you to say unfair things like that.”
Another time I was working within a company that had a very disturbing
conflict for more than fifteen months, and the conflict was creating morale as
well as productivity problems. Within this conflict were two different factions
from the same department. The conflict involved a debate over which piece of
software to use, and strong emotions were involved. One faction had worked
very hard to develop the software that was presently in use, and they wanted to
continue its use. The other faction had strong emotions tied up in a new piece of
software.
When I met with this group, I started in the same way as with the husband and
wife. I asked both sides to tell me what needs of theirs would be better fulfilled
by the software they advocated. As in the situation with the husband and wife, I
didn’t receive a clear expression of needs. Instead, each side responded with an
intellectual analysis, which the other side received as criticism.
A member of one faction said, “I think that if we continue to be overly
conservative we could be out of work in the future, because to be progressive
requires that we take some risks and dare to show that we are beyond old-
fashioned ways of doing things.” A member of the other faction responded, “But
I think that impulsively grabbing for every new thing that comes along is not in
our best interest.” They told me that they had been repeating these same analyses
of one another for months and were getting nowhere. In fact, they were creating
a lot of tension among themselves.
Like the husband and wife, they didn’t know how to directly express their
needs. Instead they were making analyses and were being heard by the other side
as critical. This is how wars are created. When we’re not able to say clearly what
we need and only know how to make analyses of others that sound like criticism,
wars are never far away, whether they are verbal, psychological, or physical.
Sensing the Needs of Others (No Matter How They Express
Themselves)
The approach to conflict resolution that I am describing requires not only that welearn to express our needs, but also that we assist others in clarifying their needs.
We can train ourselves to hear needs being expressed through the messages of
others, regardless of how others are expressing themselves.
I’ve taught myself to do this because I believe that every message, whatever
its form or content, is an expression of a need. If we accept this assumption, we
can train ourselves to sense what needs might be at the root of any particular
message. Thus, if I ask a question about what someone has just said, and that
person responds, “That’s a stupid question,” I choose to sense what the other
person might need as expressed through that particular judgment of me. For
example, I might guess that a need for understanding was not being fulfilled
when I asked that particular question. Or if I request that someone talk with me
about some stress in our relationship, and the response is, “I don’t want to talk
about it,” I might sense a need for protection from what that person imagines
might happen if we communicate.
This ability to sense what people need is crucial in mediating conflicts. We
can help by sensing what both sides need and putting it into words, and then we
help each side hear the other side’s needs. This creates a quality of connection
that moves the conflict to successful resolution.
Let me give you an example of what I mean. I often work with groups of
married couples. In these groups, I identify the couple with the most long-
standing conflict, and I make a rather startling prediction to the group. I predict
that we will be able to resolve this long-standing conflict 
within twenty minutes
from the point at which both sides can tell me what the other side needs.
When I was doing this with one group, we identified a couple that had been
married for thirty-nine years. They had a conflict about money. Six months into
the marriage, the wife had twice overdrawn the checkbook, so the husband had
taken control of the checkbook and wouldn’t let her write checks from that point
on. They had been arguing about this for thirty-nine years.
When the wife heard my prediction, she said, “Marshall, I can tell you this—
that’s not going to happen. I mean, we have a good marriage, we communicate
quite well, but in this conflict we just have different needs about money. I don’t
see how it can possibly be resolved in twenty minutes.”
I corrected her by saying that I hadn’t predicted we’d resolve it in twenty
minutes. “I predicted resolution within twenty minutes after both of you tell me
what the other person needs.” She said, “But Marshall, we communicate very
well, and when you have been talking about something for thirty-nine years, you
certainly understand what the other side needs.”
I responded, “Well, I’ve been wrong before. I certainly could be wrong in this
situation, but let’s explore. Tell me—if you know what his needs are, what arethey?”
She said, “It’s very obvious, Marshall. He doesn’t want me to spend any
money.”
The husband immediately reacted by saying, “That’s ridiculous.”
It was clear that she and I had a different definition of 
needs. 
When she said
he didn’t want her to spend any money, she was identifying what I call a
strategy. Even if she were right, she would have been accurate about his desired
strategy 
but not about his 
need. 
A need, as I define it, contains no reference to
specific actions, such as spending money or not spending money.
I told her that all human beings have the same needs, and I was certain that if
she could get clear about what her husband’s needs were and if he were clear
about her needs, we could resolve the issue. I said, “Can you try again? What do
you think his need is?”
And she said, “Well, let me explain, Marshall. You see, he’s just like his own
father.” And then she told me how her father-in-law was reluctant to spend
money.
I stopped her and said, “Hold on, now. You’re giving me an analysis of why
he is the way he is. What I am asking is for you to simply tell me 
what need of
his is involved in this situation. You’re giving me an intellectual analysis of what
has gone on in his life.”
It was very clear that she didn’t know how to identify his need. Even after
thirty-nine years of talking, she still didn’t have an idea of what his needs were.
She had diagnoses of him, she had an intellectual awareness of what his reasons
might be for not wanting her to have the checkbook, but she didn’t really
understand his needs in this situation.
So, I asked the husband, “Since your wife is not in touch with what your
needs are, why don’t you tell her? What needs of yours are being met by keeping
the checkbook yourself ?”
He said, “Marshall, she’s a wonderful wife, a wonderful mother. But when it
comes to money, she’s totally irresponsible.”
Again, notice the difference between the question I asked him, “What are your
needs in this situation?” and his response. Instead of telling me what his needs
were, he gave me a diagnosis that she was irresponsible. It’s that kind of
language that I believe gets in the way of resolving conflicts peacefully. At the
point where either party hears themselves criticized, diagnosed, or intellectually
interpreted, I predict their energy will turn toward self-defense and
counteraccusations rather than toward resolutions that meet everyone’s needs.
I pointed out to him that he was not really in touch with what his needs were,
and I showed that he was giving me a diagnosis of his wife instead. Then I againasked him, “What are your needs in this situation?” He couldn’t identify them.
Even after thirty-nine years of discussion, neither person was really aware of
the other person’s needs. Here was a situation in which my ability to sense needs
could help them out of conflict. I used Nonviolent Communication skills to
guess the needs that the husband and wife were expressing as judgments.
I reminded the husband that he had said his wife was totally irresponsible
about money (a judgment), and then I asked, “Are you feeling scared in this
situation because you have a need to protect the family economically?” When I
said this, he looked at me and said, “That’s exactly what I’m saying!” Of course,
he hadn’t been saying exactly that, but when we sense what people need, I
believe that we’re getting closer to the truth, closer to what they are trying to say.
I believe that all analysis that implies wrongness is basically a tragic expression
of unmet needs. If we can hear what people need, it’s a great gift to them,
because it helps them get connected to life.
Although I happened to guess right in this situation, it didn’t require that I
guess right. Even if I had been off, at least I was focusing his attention on needs.
Focusing in this way helps people get more in touch with their needs. It takes
them out of the analysis and gets them more connected to life.
Checking to See That Needs Are Accurately Received
Once he had expressed his need, the next step was to be sure that his wife had
heard it. This is a crucial skill in conflict resolution. We can’t assume that just
because a message is expressed, the other person receives it accurately.
Whenever I am mediating a conflict, if I am not sure that the people hearing the
message have accurately received it, I ask them to repeat it back.
I asked his wife, “Could you tell me what you heard your husband’s needs are
in this situation?”
And she said, “Well, just because I overdrew the bank account a couple of
times when we got married, that doesn’t mean I’m going to continue doing it.”
Her response was not atypical in my experience. When people have pain built
up over many years, even when the other person clearly expresses a need, it
doesn’t mean the first person can hear it. Often, they’re both so filled with their
own pain that it gets in the way of their hearing one another.
I asked her if she could possibly repeat back what the husband had said, but it
was clear that she really hadn’t heard it, that she was in too much pain. I said to
her, “I would like to tell you what I heard your husband say, and I would like
you to repeat it back.” I continued, “I heard your husband say that he has a needto protect the family. He’s scared, because he really wants to be sure that the
family is protected.”
Providing Empathy to Heal the Pain (That Prevents People from
Hearing One Other)
The wife still couldn’t hear her husband’s need, so I used another skill that is
often necessary in conflict resolution—I shifted. Instead of trying to get her to
repeat what he’d said, I tried to understand the pain that she felt.
I said, “I sense that you’re feeling really hurt, and you need to be trusted so
that you can learn from past experience.” You could tell from her eyes that she
really needed that understanding, and she said, “Yes, exactly.”
Having received this understanding, I hoped that she would now be able to
hear her husband, so once again I repeated what I understood his needs to be. He
needed to protect the family. I asked her to repeat back what she heard. She
replied, “So, he thinks I’m spending too much money.”
As you see, she wasn’t trained to hear needs any more than she was trained to
express them. Instead of hearing his needs, all she heard was a diagnosis of
herself. I suggested that she try to just hear the needs, without hearing any
criticism of herself in it. After I repeated it two more times, she was finally able
to hear her husband’s needs.
Then I reversed the process and asked the wife to express her needs. Again,
she wasn’t able to do it directly; she expressed her need in the form of a
judgment and said, “He doesn’t trust me. He thinks I’m stupid and that I’m not
going to be able to learn. I think that’s unfair. I mean, just because I did it a
couple of times doesn’t mean I’ll continue to do it.”
Once again I loaned her the skill of my being able to sense her needs behind
all of that. I said to her, “It sounds like you really have a need to be trusted. You
really want acknowledgment that you can learn from the situation.”
Then I asked the husband to tell me what his wife’s needs were. And just as
she had judgments that kept her from hearing him at first, he couldn’t hear
her. He wanted to defend his need to protect the family and began to explain that
she was a good wife, a good mother, but that she was just totally irresponsible
when it came to money. I had to help him hear through his judgment, to just hear
what her needs were, so I said, “Would you please just tell me what her needs
are?” He had to have it repeated three times, but finally he heard her need was to
be trusted.
As I had predicted, at the point when they both had heard each other’s needs,it didn’t take twenty minutes to find a way of getting everybody’s needs met. It
took much less time than that!
The more I have been involved in conflicts over the years and the more I’ve
seen what leads families to argue or what leads nations to war, the more I believe
that most schoolchildren could resolve these conflicts. If people just asked,
“Here are the needs of both sides. Here are the resources. What can be done to
meet these needs?” the conflict would be easy to resolve. But tragically, we’re
not taught to think in terms of the human needs involved, and our thinking does
not go to that level. Instead it goes to dehumanizing one another with labels and
judgments, and then even the simplest of conflicts becomes very difficult to
solve.
Resolving Disputes Between Groups of People
To show how these same principles can apply when there are more than two
people involved, let’s examine a conflict that I was asked to mediate between
two tribes in Nigeria. These tribes had enormous violence going on between
them for the previous year. In fact, one-fourth of their population had been killed
—one hundred out of four hundred people dead—in one year.
Seeing this violence, a colleague of mine who lives in Nigeria had worked
hard to get the chiefs on both sides to agree to meet with me to see if we could
resolve the conflict. After much effort, he finally got them to agree.
As we were walking into the session, my colleague whispered to me, “Be
prepared for a little bit of tension, Marshall. Three of the people in the room
know that the person who killed their child is in that room.” It was very tense at
first. There had been so much violence between these two groups, and it was the
first time they had really sat down together.
I started with the question with which I frequently start conflict resolution
sessions in order to focus on people’s needs. I said to both sides, “I’d like
whoever would like to speak first to say what your needs are in this situation.
After everyone understands the needs of everyone else, then we’ll move to
finding some ways of meeting the needs.”
Unfortunately, like the husband and wife, they didn’t have a literacy of needs
—they only knew how to tell me what was wrong with the other side. Instead of
responding to my question, the chief from one side looked across the table and
said, “You people are murderers,” and the other side responded, “You’ve been
trying to dominate us. We’re not going to tolerate it anymore!” We had more
tension after two sentences than we had when I had walked in.Obviously, getting people together to communicate doesn’t help unless they
know how to communicate in a way that connects them as human beings. My
job was the same as it was with the married couple: lend them the ability to
sense the needs behind whatever is being expressed.
I turned to the chief who had said “You people are murderers” and guessed,
“Chief, do you have a need for safety and to be sure that whatever conflicts are
going on will be resolved by some means other than violence?” The chief
immediately said to me, “Of course, that’s what I’m saying!” Well, of course, he
hadn’t said that. He’d said that the other person was a murderer and had made a
judgment rather than expressing his needs. However, now we had his needs out
on the table, so I turned to a chief from the other side and said, “Chief, would
you please reflect back what he said his needs were?”
The chief responded to this man by asking in a very hostile way, “Then why
did you kill my son?”
That started an uproar between the two groups. After things calmed down, I
said, “Chief, we’ll deal with your reaction to his needs later, but at the moment, I
suggest that you just hear his needs. Could you repeat back what he said his
needs were?” He couldn’t do it. He was so emotionally involved in this situation
and in his judgments of the other person that he didn’t hear what the other
person’s needs were. I repeated the needs as I had heard them and said, “Chief, I
heard the other chief saying that he has a need for safety. He has a need to feel
secure—that no matter what conflicts are present, they’ll be resolved in some
way other than by violence. Could you just reflect back what that need is, so that
I’m sure everybody’s communicating?” He couldn’t do it. I had to repeat it two
or three times before he could hear the other person’s needs.
I reversed the process and said to the second chief, “I thank you for hearing
that he has this need for security. Now I’d like to hear what your needs are in
this.” He said, “They have been trying to dominate us. They are a dominating
group of people. They think they’re better than everybody.” Once again, this
started a fight with the other side. I had to interrupt and say, “Excuse me, excuse
me.” After the group settled down, I went back to trying to sense the needs
behind his statement that the other side was dominating.
I asked, “Chief, is your need behind that statement a need for equality? You
really need to feel that you’re being treated equally in this community?” And he
said, “Yes, of course!”
Again, the job was to get the chief on the other side to hear, which wasn’t
easy. It took three or four repetitions before I could get the chief on the other side
just to see the need that this other human being was expressing. Finally, the chief
was able to hear the other chief saying he had a need for equality.After I spent this much time getting both sides to express their needs and to
hear each other’s needs (this took close to two hours), another chief who hadn’t
spoken jumped to his feet, looked at me, and said something very intensely in his
own language. I was very curious about what he was trying to express to me
with such intensity, and I eagerly awaited the translation. I was very touched
when the translator said, “The chief says we cannot learn this way of
communicating in one day. But he says that if we know how to communicate
this way, we don’t have to kill each other.”
I said to the translator, “Tell the chief I am very grateful that he sees what can
happen when we hear each other’s needs. Tell him that today my objective is to
help resolve the conflict peacefully to everyone’s satisfaction, and I am hoping
that people can see the value in this way of communicating. Tell him that if
people on both sides would like, we will be glad to train people within each tribe
to communicate this way, so that future conflicts can be resolved this way rather
than through violence.”
That chief wanted to be one of the members to be trained. In fact, before I left
that day, we had members from both tribes eager to learn this process that would
allow everyone to hear needs behind whatever message was being expressed. I
am happy to report that the war between the tribes ended that day.
Offering Strategies in Positive Action Language
After I help parties in a conflict express their needs and connect with the needs
of others, I suggest we move on to look for strategies that meet everyone’s
needs. In my experience, if we move too quickly to strategies, we may find some
compromises, but we won’t have the same quality of resolution. However, if we
thoroughly understand needs before moving to proposed solutions, we increase
the likelihood that both parties will stay with the agreement.
Of course, it’s not enough just to help each side see what the other side needs.
We must end with action—action that meets everyone’s needs. This requires that
we be able to express proposed strategies clearly in present, positive action
language.
By “present” language, I mean a clear statement of what is wanted from the
other side 
at this moment. 
For example, start with, “I’d like you to tell me if you
would be willing to . . . ,” and then say the action that you would like the other
person to take. Bringing it into the present by saying, “Would you be willing to .
. . ?” makes it easier to foster a respectful discussion. If the other side says they
are not willing, we can find out why. I’ve found that conflicts move more towardresolution if we can learn to say the request in present language.
If I say, “I’d like you to go to the show with me Saturday night,” it’s pretty
clear what I want on Saturday night, but it doesn’t necessarily make 
clear what I
want from them at that moment. At that moment I may want them to tell me
whether they would be willing to go. I may want them to tell me how they feel
about going with me. I may want them to tell me whether they have any
reservations about going, and so forth.
The more we can be clear about what response we’re wanting 
right now,
 the
more quickly conflict can move toward resolution.
I also suggest that requests be expressed in 
positive action language 
by stating
clearly what we do want done to meet our needs, rather than what we don’t want.
In conflict situations, telling people what we don’t want creates both confusion
and resistance. This applies even when we’re talking to ourselves. If we just tell
ourselves what we don’t want to do, we’re not likely to make much change in
the situation.
I can think of a time several years ago when I was debating an issue on public
television. The program was recorded earlier in the day so it could be shown in
the evening, and I was able to go home and watch it. While I was watching this
program, I became very upset with myself, because I was doing three things I
don’t like doing when I’m debating. I remember saying to myself, “If I’m ever
debating an issue like this again, I don’t want to do A, I don’t want to do B, I
don’t want to do C.”
I had a chance to redeem myself, because the following week I was asked to
continue the same debate. As I was going to the television station, I repeated to
myself: “Now, remember, don’t do A, don’t do B, and don’t do C.” I got on the
program, the other debater came at me the same way he had been
communicating the previous week, and what did I do? For ten seconds I was
beautiful. But what did I do after ten seconds? A, B, and C. In fact, as I recall, I
quickly made up for the previous ten seconds!
The problem was that I had told myself what 
not 
to do. I hadn’t been clear
about exactly what I wanted to do differently. In conflict resolution, it helps both
parties to say clearly what they do want—rather than what they don’t want—in
order to meet everyone’s needs.
A woman made this point very clearly to me one time. She had a conflict with
her husband about how much time he was spending at home, so she said to him,
“I don’t want you spending so much time at work.” Afterward she got furious
with him when he signed up for a bowling league. Here again, she had said what
she didn’t want, not what she did want. If she had expressed what she did want,
it might have sounded like this, “I’d like you to tell me if you’d be willing tospend at least one evening a week with the children and me.”
Action language means saying clearly what we do want when we make a
request by using clear action verbs. It also means avoiding language that
obscures our needs or that sounds like an attack.
For example, one couple had a conflict for twelve years. The woman had
a need for understanding that wasn’t being met in the relationship. When I got
her partner to reflect her need, I said, “Okay, now let’s get down to strategies.” I
asked, “What do you want—from him, for example—to meet your need for
understanding?” She looked at her husband and replied, “I’d like you to listen to
me when I talk to you.” He said, “I do listen.” and she said, “No, you don’t.”
And he said, “Yes, I do.” They told me they’d had this same conversation for
twelve years. This is what happens when we use words like 
listen 
to express our
strategies. It’s too vague. It’s not an action verb.
With my help, this woman realized what she really wanted from her partner
when she said, “I want you to listen.” She wanted him to reflect back what she
was saying, so that she could be sure she had made herself clear. When she made
that positive action request of him, he was quite willing to do it. She was
delighted because this strategy really met her need. Finally she was getting a
need met that she had been very eager to have met for twelve years. All she had
been lacking was clear language for telling him what she wanted.
A similar husband-and-wife conflict involved the wife’s need for her husband
to respect her choices. Once her husband understood, I said, “Now that your
husband understands your need to have your choices respected, what are you
requesting of him? What are your strategies for getting that need met?”
She said, “Well, I want you to give me the freedom to grow and be myself,”
and he replied, “I do.” She responded, “No, you don’t,” and he said, “I do.” Then
I said, “Hold it! Hold on!”
Once again we see nonaction language exacerbating a conflict. People can
easily hear “Give me the freedom to grow” as implying that they are a slave-
master or domineering. This request doesn’t make clear what 
is 
wanted. I
pointed this out to the wife. I said, “I’d like you to tell him exactly what you
want him to do to better meet your need for having your choices respected.”
She replied, “I want you to allow me . . . ,” and I stopped her and said, “I’m
afraid that 
allow 
is vague also. Can you use a more concrete action verb than
allow?”
She replied, “Well, how about if I want him to let me?” “No,” I said. “That’s
still pretty vague. What do you really mean when you say you want a person to
let you?”
After thinking it over for a few seconds, she came to an important awareness.She said, “Uh-oh, Marshall, I see what’s going on. I know what I want from him
when I say ‘I want you to let me be’ and ‘I want you to give me the freedom to
grow.’ But if I say this in clear language, it’s pretty embarrassing. Besides, I can
see that he couldn’t do it, because I want him to tell me it’s okay no matter what
I do.”
When she got clear about what she was actually requesting, she saw that it
didn’t leave him much freedom to be himself and to have 
his 
choices respected.
Respect is a key element of successful conflict resolution.
RESOLVING CONFLICTS WITH AUTHORITIES
I was working with a group of minority students in a Southern city many years
ago. They had the impression that the principal of their school was very racist in
many of his behaviors, and they wanted my help in developing skills to resolve
their conflicts with him.
When we worked in our training session, they defined their needs clearly.
When we talked about expressing their request, they said, “Marshall, we’re not
optimistic about making requests of him. We have made requests of him in the
past, and it wasn’t very pleasant. In the past, he has said, ‘Get out of here, or I’m
going to call the police.’” I asked, “What request did you make of him?”
One of the students replied, “We said we didn’t want him telling us how we
could wear our hair.” They were referring to the fact that the principal barred
them from the football team unless they cut their hair short. I pointed out to
them, “Telling him what you don’t want (you don’t want him telling you how to
wear your hair) is really not what I’m suggesting. I’m suggesting you learn how
to tell him what you do want.”
Another student said, “Well, we told him we wanted fairness.” I responded,
“Well, that’s a need. We have a need for fairness. Once we know our needs, the
next step is to be clear with people about what we really want them to do. What
can they do to meet our needs? We have to learn how to say that more clearly.”
We worked very hard and came up with thirty-eight requests in positive action
language, and we practiced how to present the requests in 
a respectful,
nondemanding way. Doing that means that after you make your request, no
matter how the other person responds—whether the person says yes or no—you
give an equal amount of respect and understanding. If they say no, try to
understand 
what need they are meeting 
that keeps them from saying yes.
Respecting Is Not the Same as ConcedingUnderstanding other people’s needs does not mean you have to give up your
own needs. It does mean demonstrating to them that you are interested in 
both
your needs 
and 
theirs. When they trust that, there’s much more likelihood of
everyone’s needs getting met, which is what happened in the situation with the
principal.
The students went in, told the principal their needs, and expressed their thirty-
eight requests in clear action language. They listened to what needs the principal
had, and in the end, the principal agreed to all thirty-eight of their requests.
About two weeks later, I got a call from a representative of the school district
asking if I would teach their school administrator what I had taught those
students.
It’s very important when expressing our requests to be respectful of the other
person’s reaction, regardless of whether that person agrees to the request. One of
the most important messages another person can give us is “no” or “I don’t want
to.” If we listen well to this message, it will help us understand the other
person’s needs. If we are listening to other people’s needs, we will see that every
time they say no, they’re really saying they have a need that is not addressed by
our strategy, which keeps them from saying yes. If we can teach ourselves to
hear the need behind that no, we will find an openness toward getting everyone’s
needs met.
Of course, if we hear the no as a rejection, or if we start to blame the other
person for saying no, then it’s not likely that we’re going to find a way of getting
everyone’s needs met. It’s key that throughout the process we keep everyone’s
attention focused on 
meeting everyone’s needs.
I’m very optimistic about what can happen in any conflict if we create this
quality of connection. If all sides in a conflict get clear about what they need and
hear the other side’s needs and if people express their strategies in clear action
language, then even if the other person says no, the focus returns to meeting
needs. 
If we all do this, we will easily find strategies that get everyone’s needs
met.
WHEN YOU CAN’T GET THE TWO SIDES TOGETHER
As I said, I’m very optimistic about what can happen when we get people
together and talking at this level, but that requires getting them together. In
recent years, I have been looking for strategies for resolving conflicts in which
we can’t get both sides together.
One strategy that I’m very pleased with involves the use of a recorder. I work
with each party separately and play the role of the other person. Here’s what thislooks like: A woman came to me very much in pain because of the conflict
between her and her husband, especially because of how he was handling his
anger and beating her at times. She wanted him to come to the meeting with her
and talk about this conflict that they had, but he refused. When she came into my
office, I said, “Let me play the role of your husband.” In that role, I listened to
what she was saying and respectfully heard the feelings that she was expressing
and how it felt to her to be hit and to not be understood as she would like.
I listened in a way that helped her get her needs more clearly expressed and
that showed a respectful understanding of her needs. Then, still in the role of the
husband, I expressed what I guessed the husband’s needs were and asked her to
hear me. We recorded this role-play with me playing the role of the husband,
and, with my help, we clearly communicated her needs. Then I asked her to take
this recording to her husband and get his reaction to it.
When she took the recording to her husband and he heard how I had played
his role, he felt a good deal of relief. Apparently, I had guessed accurately what
his needs were. As a result of the understanding that he felt due to how I had
empathically played his role, he did come in, and we continued to work together
until they found other ways of meeting their needs besides violence.
CONCLUSION
I’ve been sharing some of my concepts of conflict resolution, showing how
much I believe a literacy of needs helps, how important it is both to express
needs and to hear the other side’s needs, and then to look for strategies and to
express them using clear action language.
I hope that what I’ve shared supports your efforts to resolve personal conflicts
more harmoniously and that it also supports your efforts to mediate the conflicts
of others. I hope it strengthens your awareness of 
the precious flow of
communication that allows conflicts to be resolved so that everyone’s needs are
fulfilled. I also hope that it increases your awareness of the possibility of
communication that precludes the necessity of coercion, a flow of
communication that increases our awareness of our interdependence.2
 
B
EING
 M
E
, L
OVING
 Y
OU
A Practical Guide to Extraordinary Relationships
 
T
he following are excerpts from workshops and media interviews I’ve given on
the subject of intimacy and close personal relationships. Through role-playing
and discussion, I touch on most of the key aspects of applying Nonviolent
Communication to create loving relationships with our partners, spouses, and
family while maintaining our personal integrity and values.
WORKSHOP INTRODUCTION
So, guess what happened today? I’m doing this relationship workshop in the
evening, and I had a crisis at seven o’clock this morning. My wife called and
asked me one of those questions that you just hate to have in a relationship at
any time of the day, but especially at seven in the morning when you don’t have
your lawyer. What did she ask at seven o’clock in the morning? “Did I wake you
up?” That question wasn’t the hard one. She says, “I have a very important
Am I attractive?” [Laughter.] I hate those questions. That’s like the
time I came home after being on the road quite awhile, and she asked me, “Can
you see anything different in the house?” I looked, and I looked: “No.” She had
painted the whole house! [Laughter.]
I knew that question this morning was the kind that comes up in
relationships.“Am I attractive?” Of course, as an NVC-speaking person, I could
get out of that by claiming that it’s not an NVC question, because we know that
nobody 
is 
anything. Nobody is right, wrong, attractive, or unattractive. But I
knew she wouldn’t settle for any of that stuff, so I said, “You want to know if
you’re attractive?” She said, “Yes.” I said, “Sometimes yes, sometimes no; can I
go back to bed?” [Laughter.] She liked that—thank goodness!In one of my favorite books, 
How to Make Yourself Miserable
 by Dan
Greenburg, you see this dialogue:
 
“Do you love me? Now, this is very important to me.
 
Think it over: Do you love me?”
 
“Yes.”
 
“Please, this is very important. Give it very serious consideration:
 
Do you love me?”
 
(Period of silence) “Yes.”
 
“Then why did you hesitate?” (Laughter.)
 
People can change how they think and communicate. They can treat themselves
with much more respect, and they can learn from their limitations without hating
themselves. We teach people how to do this with Nonviolent Communication.
We show people a process that can help them connect with the people they’re
closest to in a way that can allow them to enjoy deeper intimacy, to give to one
another with more enjoyment, and to not get caught up in doing things out of
duty, obligation, guilt, shame, and the other things that destroy intimate
relationships. We show people how to enjoy working cooperatively in a working
community. We show them how to transform domination structures and
hierarchal structures into working communities in which people share a vision of
how they can contribute to life. And we’re thrilled with how many people all
over the world have great energy for making this happen.
A TYPICAL CONFLICT
PARTICIPANT Marshall, what do you think is the major conflict, the major
issue, between men and women?
MARSHALL:
 Well, I hear a lot of this in my work. Women come up to me
regularly and say, “Marshall, I wouldn’t want you to get the wrong idea. I
have a very wonderful husband.” And then, of course, I know the word 
but
 is
coming. “But I never know how he’s feeling.” Men all over the planet (and
there are exceptions to this) come from the John Wayne school of expressing
emotions—the Clint Eastwood, the Rambo school—where you kind of grunt.
Instead of saying clearly what’s going on inside of you, you label people as
John Wayne would when he walked into a tavern in the movies. He never,
even if there were guns trained on him, said, “I’m scared.” He might have
been out in the desert for six months, but he never said, “I’m lonely.” So howdid John communicate? John communicated by labeling people. It’s a simple
classification system. They were either a good guy—buy them a drink—or a
bad guy—kill them.
 With that way of communicating, which was basically how I was trained to
communicate, you don’t learn how to get in touch with your own emotions. If
you’re being trained to be a warrior, you want to keep your feelings out of
your consciousness. Well, to be married to a warrior is not a very rich
experience for a woman who may have been playing dolls while the boys were
out playing war. She wants intimacy, but the man doesn’t have a vocabulary
that makes it easy to do that.
 On the other hand, women are not taught to be very clear about their needs.
They’ve been taught for several centuries to deny their own needs and to take
care of others. So they often depend on the man for leadership and expect him
to kind of guess what they need and want and to fulfill that, to take care of
that. I see these issues regularly, but, as I say, there are certainly a lot of
individual differences.
PARTICIPANT Let’s do a role-play, the kind of thing that happens between men
and women. Can you set it up? I mean, what they fight about the most.
MARSHALL:
 Well, one of the most frequent issues is the woman saying to the
man, “I don’t feel the connection with you that I would like. I really want to
feel more of an emotional connection with you. And how do you feel when I
say that?” And the man says, “Huh?”
PARTICIPANT Well, yeah, let me play the man.
PARTICIPANT A, AS HUSBAND:
 Well, what do you want? What do you want me to
do?
MARSHALL, AS WIFE:
 Well, like right now, instead of asking me that question, I
would like to know what you’re feeling. Are you hurt by what I said? Are you
angry? Are you scared?
PARTICIPANT A, AS HUSBAND:
 I don’t know.
MARSHALL, AS WIFE:
 This is what I mean. When you don’t know what you’re
feeling, it’s very hard for me to feel safe and trusting.
PARTICIPANT A, AS HUSBAND:
 Well, I feel like you’re … I feel like you’re
criticizing me.
MARSHALL, AS WIFE:
 So you’re feeling kind of hurt, and you want me to respect
you and to appreciate what you offer in our relationship.
PARTICIPANT A, AS HUSBAND:
 Well, yeah.
MARSHALL, AS WIFE:
 And see, I would’ve liked for you to have said that. I
would’ve liked to have heard you say, “I’m hurt, I’d like some appreciation.”But notice you didn’t say that. You said, “You’re criticizing me.” You required
me to have to take a deep breath and not get caught up in that and not hear a
judgment in what you say, and instead to try to hear what you’re feeling and
what you might need. I’d like not to work so hard at that. I’d really appreciate
it if you could just tell me what’s going on inside you.
PARTICIPANT A, AS HUSBAND:
 Well, I don’t know what’s going on inside of me
most of the time. What do you want from me?
MARSHALL, AS WIFE:
 Well, first, I am just glad we’re having this conversation
now. I want you to know that I hope I can stay aware of how confusing it is
for you to give me what I want. I’m trying to become conscious that it is such
a new thing for you, and I want to be patient. But I would like to hear what’s
going on in you.
PARTICIPANT A, AS HUSBAND:
 Well, right now, I guess I’m just glad that you’re
telling me what you need.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 That’s a very typical kind of interaction that goes on.
The man very often hears demands coming from the woman.
ON THE SUBJECT OF MARRIAGE
You may have heard me say that it is harder to relate within a marriage than
outside because of all the crazy things we are taught about what “marriage”
means. I find I enjoy the person I’m living with much more if I don’t think of her
as “my wife,” because in the culture I grew up in, when men say “my wife” they
start to think of her as some kind of property.
NVC is a language that makes it possible for us to connect with one another in
a way that enables us to give to each other from the heart. This means that with
your partner you don’t do things because of titles that imply you are “supposed
to,” “should,” “ought to,” or “must.” You don’t give out of guilt, shame,
unconsciousness, fear, obligation, or duty. It is my belief that whenever we do
anything for one another out of that kind of energy, everybody loses. When we
receive something given out of that kind of energy, we know we are going to
have to pay for it, because it was done at the other person’s expense. I’m
interested in a process in which we give to each other from the heart.
How do we learn to give from the heart in such a way that giving feels like
receiving? When things are being done in a human way, I don’t think you can
tell the giver from the receiver. It’s only when we interact in what I call a
judging or judgmental manner that giving isn’t much fun.LEARNING THROUGH FOUR QUESTIONS
Let me suggest that you write some things down. I’m going to ask you four
questions. If you are married or partnered, then pretend that I am asking you as
your partner or spouse. If you want to focus on some other relationship, pick
someone you’re close to—perhaps a good friend.
As your NVC partner, I’m going to ask you the four questions that deeply
interest NVC-speaking people about all relationships, but particularly intimate
ones. Please write down your answer to each of these four questions as though
you were asked by this other person. [Reader: I invite you to do this on your own
on a separate sheet of paper.]
The first question: 
Would you tell me one thing that I do as your partner or
friend that makes life less than wonderful for you?
 As an NVCer, I don’t want to
take any action or say anything that doesn’t enrich your life. So it would be a
great service if any time I do something that isn’t enriching your life, you bring
that to my attention. Could you think of one thing that I do—or don’t do—that
makes life less than wonderful for you? Write down one thing.
Now, the second question. As an NVC-speaking person, not only do I want to
know what I do that makes life less than wonderful for you, but it’s also
important for me to be able to connect with your feelings moment by moment.
To be able to play the game of giving to one another from our hearts, your
feelings are critical and I need to be aware of them. It’s stimulating when we can
be in touch with one another’s feelings. My second question then is,
When I do
what I do, how do you feel?
Write down how you feel.
Let’s move to the third question. As an NVC-speaking person, I realize that
how we feel is a result of what our needs are and what is happening to our needs.
When our needs are getting fulfilled, we have feelings that fall under the heading
of “pleasurable feelings,” like happy, satisfied, joyful, blissful, and content.
When our needs are not being satisfied, we have the kind of feelings that you
just wrote down. So, this is question three: 
What needs of yours are not getting
met?
I’d like you to tell me why you feel as you do in terms of your needs: “I feel
as I do because I would have liked _____” (or “because I was wanting, wishing,
or hoping for ______”). Write down your unmet needs in this format.
Now the NVCer is excited, because he wants to get on to the next question,
which is the center of life for all NVC-speaking people. I can’t wait to hear the
answer to this. Is everybody ready for the big NVC question?I am aware that I am doing something that is not enriching your life and that
you have certain feelings about that. You’ve told me what needs of yours are not
getting fulfilled. Now, please tell me what I can do to make your most wonderful
dreams come true. That is what NVC is all about: 
What can we do to enrich one
another’s lives?
NVC is about clearly communicating those four things to other people at any
given moment. Of course, the situation is not always about our needs getting
met. We also say thank you in NVC and tell people how they have truly enriched
our lives by telling them the first three things. We tell them (1) what they’ve
done to enrich us, (2) what our feelings are, and (3) what needs of ours have
been fulfilled by their actions. I believe that, as human beings, there are only two
things that we are basically saying: please and thank you. The language of NVC
is set up to make our please and thank you very clear so that people do not hear
anything that gets in the way of our giving to one another from the heart.
Criticism
There are primarily two forms of communication that make giving from the
heart almost impossible for people. The first is anything that sounds to them like
a criticism. If you expressed your four answers in NVC, then there should be no
words written there that can be heard by others as a criticism of them. As you
can see, the only time you are talking about them is in the first part, where you
mention their behavior. You are not criticizing them for the behavior; you are
just calling that behavior to their attention. The other three parts are all about
you: your feelings, your unmet needs, and your requests. If you use any words
that can easily be heard by others as criticism, then my guess is that you’ve
mixed a bit of judgment into those four ingredients.
By 
criticism,
 I mean attack, judgment, blame, diagnosis, or anything that
analyzes people from the head. If your answers are in NVC, there will hopefully
be no words that are easy to pick up as criticism. However, if the other person is
wearing judging ears [Marshall puts on a pair of judging ears], they can hear
criticism no matter what you say. Tonight we’ll learn how to clean up such a
mess if it happens. We want to be able to speak NVC to anybody.
Coercion
The second block to our ability to give from the heart is any hint of coercion. As
an NVCer, you want to be able to present those four things you wrote down sothat the other person receives them as a gift, an opportunity to give, not as a
demand or an order. There is no criticism or coercion in NVC language. When
we tell others what we want, we do so in a way that communicates to them,
“Please, do this only if you can do so willingly. Please, never do anything for me
at your expense. Never do anything for me if there is the least bit of fear, guilt,
shame, resentment, or resignation behind your motives. Otherwise we’ll both
suffer. Please, honor my request only if it comes from your heart, where it is a
gift to yourself to give to me.” Only when neither person feels like they’re
losing, giving in, or giving up do both people benefit from the action.
Receiving from the Heart
There are two main parts to NVC: The first is the ability to say those four things
and get them across to the other person without the other person hearing
criticism or demand. The other part is to learn how to receive these four pieces
of information from others, regardless of whether they speak a judging language
or NVC. If the other person speaks NVC, our life will be a lot easier. That
person will say these four things with clarity, and our job will be to accurately
receive them before we react.
However, if the other person speaks a judging language, then we need to put
on “NVC ears.” [Laughter as Marshall dons a set of NVC ears.] NVC ears serve
as a translator: no matter what language the other person speaks, when we have
these ears on, we only hear NVC. For example, the other person says, “The
problem with you is ____;” but with NVC ears, I hear, “What I would like is
______.” I hear no judgment, criticism, or attack. With these ears on, I realize
that all criticism is a pathetic expression of an unmet need—pathetic because it
usually doesn’t get the person what they want and instead causes all kinds of
tension and problems. With NVC, we skip through all that. We never hear a
criticism, just unmet needs.
Listening and Responding in NVC
Let’s practice listening in NVC when people speak judgmentally. I would like
some people to volunteer their situations so we can all learn from them. If you
read what you wrote, we’ll see if you answered in NVC or whether some
judging language got mixed in.
The first question: “What is it that I do that makes life less than wonderful for
you?”PARTICIPANT B:
 You appear not to listen.
MARSHALL:
 “You appear.” Right away I can tell you aren’t answering the
question in NVC. When you say “you appear,” I know a diagnosis is coming
up. “You appear not to listen”—that’s a diagnosis. Have you ever heard one
person say, “You don’t listen,” and the other, “I do, too!” “No, you don’t!”
“Yes, I do!” You see? This is what happens when we start with a criticism
rather than an observation.
MARSHALL, AS PARTNER:
 Tell me what I do that makes you interpret me as not
listening. I can read the newspaper and watch television while you’re talking
and still hear you.
PARTICIPANT B:
 I’m observing you watching TV.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 If your partner weren’t listening with NVC, right away
he’d hear an attack. But as your partner with NVC ears, I don’t hear criticism;
I just guess the behavior you are reacting to.
MARSHALL, AS PARTNER:
 Are you reacting to the fact that I am watching
television while you are talking to me?
PARTICIPANT B:
 Yes.
MARSHALL, AS PARTNER:
 How do you feel when I watch television while you are
talking?
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 [In an aside to the participant.] And don’t answer, “I feel
not listened to!” That’s just a sneaky way of throwing in another judgment.
PARTICIPANT B:
 I feel frustrated and hurt.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 Now we’re cooking!
MARSHALL, AS PARTNER:
 Could you tell me why you feel that way?
PARTICIPANT B:
 Because I want to feel appreciated.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 Classic NVC! Notice she didn’t say, “I feel frustrated
and hurt because you watch television.” She doesn’t blame me for her
feelings, but she attributes them to her own needs: “I feel ____ because I
____.” People who judge, on the other hand, would express their feelings this
way: “You hurt me when you watch television while talking to me.” In other
words: “I feel ____ because you _____.”
 Now the fourth question: “What would you like me to do to make life
wonderful for you?”
PARTICIPANT B:
 When you are in a conversation, I would appreciate it if you
would look into my eyes, as well as tell me back what you heard me say.
MARSHALL:
 Okay. Did everybody hear the four things? “When you watch
television while I am talking, I feel frustrated and hurt because I would really
like some appreciation or attention regarding what I am saying. Would you be
willing to look me in the eye while I’m talking and then afterward repeat backwhat you heard me say and give me a chance to correct it if it isn’t what I
meant to say?”
 Now of course, the other person may hear it as criticism and will want to
defend himself: “I do listen; I can listen while I am watching television.” Or if
he heard it as a demand, he may do this: “[Sigh.] All right.” That tells us he
didn’t hear it as a request, as an opportunity to contribute to our well-being.
He heard a demand; he may comply, but if he does, you’ll wish he hadn’t
because he’ll be doing it to keep you from freaking out. He’ll do it not to make
life wonderful for you but to keep life from being miserable for him.
 That’s why marriage is a real challenge. Many people were taught that love
and marriage mean denying oneself in doing for the other person. “If I love
her, I have to do that, even though I don’t want to.” So he’ll do it, but you’ll
wish he hadn’t.
PARTICIPANT B:
 Because he’ll keep score.
MARSHALL:
 Yeah, people like that have computers in their brains: they’ll tell you
what happened twelve years ago when they denied themselves. It comes back
in one form or another. “After all the times I did things for you when I didn’t
want to, the least you can do is ______!” Oh yeah, that goes on forever; don’t
worry, they’re excellent statisticians.
ROLE-PLAYS
Hearing a Demand
PARTICIPANT C:
 So how does the NVCer respond when the person says, “I can
listen to you and watch at the same time”?
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Are you feeling annoyed because you heard some
pressure, and you would like to be free from pressure?
PARTICIPANT C:
 Of course! You’re always making demands. My God! Demand
this, demand that!
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 So you’re kind of exhausted with demands, and you
would like to do things because you feel like it and not because you feel
pressured?
PARTICIPANT C:
 Exactly.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Now I’m feeling very frustrated because I don’t know
how to let you know what I would like without you hearing it as a demand. I
know only two choices: to say nothing and not get my needs met, or to tell
you what I would like and have you hear it as a demand. Either way, I lose.Could you tell me what you just heard me say?
PARTICIPANT C:
 Huh?
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 Now, this is very confusing for people who don’t know
NVC. They grow up in a world of coercion. Their parents might have thought
that the only way to get them to do anything was to punish or guilt-trip them.
They may not be familiar with anything else. They don’t know the difference
between a request and a demand. They really believe that if they don’t do
what the other person wants, the guilt trip or the threats are going to come out.
It is not an easy job for me as an NVCer to help this person hear that my
requests are gifts, not demands. When we do succeed, however, we can save
ourselves years of misery, because any request becomes misery when people
hear it without NVC ears.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I would like to know how I can ask for what I want so it
doesn’t sound like I am pressuring you.
PARTICIPANT C:
 I don’t know.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Well, I’m glad that we’re getting this clear, because this is
my dilemma: I don’t know how to let you know what I want without you
immediately hearing either that you have to do it or that I am forcing you to
do it.
PARTICIPANT C:
 Well, I know how much the thing means to you, and … if you
love somebody, then you do what they ask.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Could I influence you to change your definition of love?
PARTICIPANT C:
 To what?
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Love is not denying ourselves and doing for others; rather,
it is honestly expressing whatever our feelings and needs are and empathically
receiving the other person’s feelings and needs. To receive empathically does
not mean that you must comply—just accurately receive what is expressed as
a gift of life from the other person. Love is honestly expressing our own
needs; that doesn’t mean making demands, but just, “Here I am. Here’s what I
like.” How do you feel about that definition of love?
PARTICIPANT C:
 If I agree with that, I’ll be a different person.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Yeah, that’s true.
Stop Me If I’m Talking “Too Much”
MARSHALL:
 How about another situation?
PARTICIPANT D:
 Sometimes people say, “I want you to be quiet; I don’t want to
listen any more,” if they are feeling overwhelmed. In a situation where theother person is talking too much …
MARSHALL:
 If you’re an NVCer, you don’t have the words “too much” in your
consciousness. To think that there is such a thing as “too much,” “just right,”
or “too little” is to entertain dangerous concepts.
PARTICIPANT D:
 What I heard you and the other trainers telling me last night is
that I have to stop once in a while to give the other person a chance to
respond.
MARSHALL:
 “Have to?”
PARTICIPANT D:
 No, not “have to.” I mean “it would be a good idea to.”
MARSHALL:
 Yes, you know you don’t have to, because there have been a lot of
times in your life when you haven’t. [Laughter.]
PARTICIPANT D:
 Well, I’d like to get some sort of signal from my friend …
MARSHALL:
 When he’s heard one more word than he wants to hear?
PARTICIPANT D:
 Right.
MARSHALL:
 The kindest thing we can do is stop people when they are using more
words than we want to hear. Notice the difference: It’s not “when they are
talking much.” I say “kindest” because I have asked several hundred people,
“If you are using more words than somebody wants to hear, do you want that
other person to pretend that they are listening or to stop you?” Everyone but
one person replied adamantly, “I want to be stopped.” Only one woman said
she didn’t know if she could handle being told to stop.
 In NVC, we know it’s not being kind to the other person to smile and open
your eyes wide to hide the fact that your head has gone dead. That isn’t
helping anybody, because the person in front of you becomes a source of stress
and strain, and nobody wants that. People want every act and every word
coming out of their mouths to enrich you. So when that isn’t happening, be
kind to them and stop them.
 Now it took me awhile to get up the courage to test this out, because in the
domination culture I grew up in, that’s not done. I remember when I first
decided to risk this in a social setting. I was working with some teachers in
Fargo, North Dakota, and I was invited to a social get-together, with
everybody sitting around talking about stuff. Within ten minutes, my energy
had dropped very low. I didn’t know where the life was in this conversation or
what people were feeling or wanting. One person would say, “Oh, do you
know what we did on our vacation?” and then they would talk about the
vacation. Then somebody else talked about theirs.
 After listening awhile, I gathered up my courage and said, “Excuse me, I’m
impatient with the conversation because I’m really not feeling as connected
with you as I’d like to be. It would help me to know if you are enjoying theconversation.” If they were, I would try to figure out how to enjoy it myself;
but all nine people stopped talking and looked at me as if I had thrown a rat in
the punch bowl.
 For about two minutes I thought I’d die, but then I remembered that it’s
never the response I receive that makes me feel bad. Since I was feeling bad, I
knew I had on my judging ears and was thinking that I had said something
wrong. After I put on my NVC ears, I was able to look at the feelings and
needs being expressed through the silence and say, “I’m guessing that you’re
all angry with me, and you would have liked for me to have just kept out of
the conversation.”
 The moment I turn my attention to what the other is feeling and needing,
already I am feeling better. With my attention there, I totally remove the other
person’s power to demoralize or dehumanize me or to leave me feeling like
PPPPPT (piss poor protoplasm poorly put together). This is true even when, as
in this case, I guess wrong. Just because I have NVC ears doesn’t mean I
always guess right. I guessed they were angry, and they weren’t.
 The first person who spoke told me, “No, I’m not angry. I was just thinking
about what you were saying.” Then he said, “I 
was
 bored with this
conversation.” And he had been the one doing most of the talking! But this no
longer surprises me; I have found that if I am bored, the person doing the
talking is probably equally bored. It usually means we are not talking from
life; instead of being in touch with our feelings and needs in this conversation,
we’re getting into some socially learned habits of boring one another. If you
are a middle-class citizen, you are probably so used to it that you don’t even
know it.
 I remember Buddy Hackett saying it wasn’t until he was in the army that he
discovered he could get up from a meal without having heartburn. He had
been so used to his mother’s cooking that heartburn had become a way of life.
Likewise, most middle-class people are so used to boredom that it’s become a
way of life. You just get together and talk from the head; there is no life in it,
but it’s the only thing you’ve known. We’re dead and don’t know it.
 When we went around our group, each one of the nine people expressed the
same feelings I had been feeling: impatient, discouraged that we were there,
lifeless, inert. Then one of the women asked, “Marshall, why do we do this?”
“Do what?” “Sit around and bore each other. You’re just here tonight, but we
get together every week and do this!” I said, “Because we probably haven’t
learned to take the risk that I just did, which is to pay attention to our vitality.
Are we really getting what we want from life? If not, let’s do something about
it. Each moment is precious, too precious. So when our vitality is down, let’sdo something about it and wake up.”
“What Do You Want from Me?”
PARTICIPANT E:
 Marshall, I was thinking about how sometimes we women get
together with our men, and we drive around and say, “Oh, isn’t that a cute
house?” or “Look at that lake—that’s the one I want to go on.” They think
they have to get us a new house or take us to the lake right away, but even
though we may seem enthusiastic, we’re not asking for anything—we’re just
talking out loud.
MARSHALL:
 Now, I want to defend men—and not just men. When you say
something and don’t say what you want back from others, you create more
pain in relationships than you are probably conscious of. Other people have to
guess, “Does she want me to say something cute and superficial about this
thing, or is she really trying to tell me something else?”
 It’s like the gentleman sitting next to his wife on the little train at the Dallas
airport that connects the terminals. I was sitting across from them. This train
was going very slowly, and the man turned to his wife in a great state of
agitation and said, “I have never seen a train go so slowly in all of my life.”
Notice how that is similar to “Isn’t that an interesting house?” What did she
want there? What does he want here? He wasn’t aware of the amount of pain it
creates for the other person when we just give commentary and don’t make
explicit what we want back. It’s a guessing game. But knowing what you want
back from your words requires a consciousness of living in the moment, of
being fully present right now. So he didn’t say anything more than, “I’ve never
seen a train go so slowly in my whole life.”
 Sitting right across from them, I could see that she was uncomfortable:
somebody she loves is in pain, and she doesn’t know what he wants. So she
did what most of us do when we don’t know what a person is wanting from us:
she said nothing.
 Then he did what most of us do when we’re not getting what we want: he
repeated himself, as though magically if you just keep repeating yourself
you’ll get what you want. We don’t realize that just burns other people’s brains
out.
 So again he said, “I have never seen a train go so slowly in all of my life!”
 I loved her response: she said, “They’re electronically timed.” I don’t think
that’s what he wanted. Why would she give him information that he already
knows? Because she was trying to be a fixer, trying to make it better. Shedidn’t know what to do, and he had contributed to her pain by not telling her
what he wanted.
 So he repeated himself a third time, “I have never seen a train go so slowly
in all of my life!” And then she said, “Well, what do you want me to do about
it?”
 You see, what he wanted is what each of us wants every day, and when we
don’t get it, there is a significant effect on our morale. We want it every day,
usually more than one time a day, and when we don’t get it, we pay a high
cost. Most of the time when we want it, we’re not conscious of it, and even if
we are conscious of it, we don’t know how to ask for it. It’s tragic.
 I am confident that what he wanted was empathy. He wanted a response
that would tell him that she was in contact with his feelings and needs.
 If they had studied NVC, the conversation might have sounded like this:
HUSBAND:
 Boy, I’ve never seen a train go so slowly in all of my life! Could
you just reflect back right now what I’m feeling and needing?
 
WIFE:
 So I guess you’re really aggravated, and you wish they would have
managed these trains differently.
 
HUSBAND:
 Yes, and more than that, you know if we don’t get there in time,
then we’re going to be late, and we might have to pay extra for our
tickets.
 
WIFE:
 So you’re scared, and you’d like to get there on time so that we don’t
have to end up paying more money.
 
HUSBAND:
 Yeah [sigh].
 When we are in pain, there is something enormously valuable to just having
another person in contact with it. It’s amazing how that kind of attention can
make such a difference. It doesn’t solve our problem, but it provides the kind
of connection that lets the problem-solving become more bearable. When we
don’t get that—as he didn’t—then we both end up in more pain than when we
started.
Issues about Food
PARTICIPANT F:
 Marshall, can I share something that happened last night? I felt
bad that my husband couldn’t be there for the second night of the partner
workshop. I got home at 11 p.m., and he called at about 11:05 from his motel.
I related what had happened in the class and what he had missed—the group
had discussed eating issues, which were important to me because I’m a
compulsive eater. My husband and I had gotten to the point where he didn’teven want to discuss food with me, because he thought I was killing myself
with food. It was so painful for him, he wouldn’t even talk about it.
 So I told him about your suggestion and what had gone on at the workshop,
and he opened up for the first time in years. When he gets home from
teaching, he eats an ice cream to deal with emotions that come from a bad
teaching day, and so we were able to actually give each other a lot of empathy
over eating as a way to hide from the pain.
 Then yesterday I got in contact—really in contact. I wanted some Almond
Mocha candy, so I just imagined the chocolate and the almonds and the
crunchy stuff underneath. And I thought, “What am I really looking for?”
Love! It was just like a flashbulb going off in my head: what I am looking for
is love.
MARSHALL:
 You wanted some kind of connection with him. And in the past, not
knowing how to ask for that connection, it might have taken the form of
candy.
PARTICIPANT F:
 Yes, it was great! We talked for an hour long distance. I think it
was a first opening.
MARSHALL:
 So two nights in a row you’ve had a real connection! Now we have
to get you talking NVC with yourself and away from thinking that there really
is such a thing as a “compulsive overeater.”You can’t say those words in
NVC, because there are no judgments in NVC. Remember, all judgments are
tragic expressions of other things. NVC is a process. When we say anything
about ourselves like, “I am a _____,” it’s static thinking; it puts us in a box
and leads to self-fulfilling prophecies. When we think that we (or somebody
else) 
is
 something, we usually act in a way that makes it happen. There is no
verb “to be” in NVC; you can’t say, “This person is lazy,” “This person is
normal,” “This person is right.” Let’s translate “compulsive overeater” into
NVC. Use the four things you have already worked with tonight.
PARTICIPANT F:
 “Whenever I eat out of my needs to be loved or to be touched
…”
MARSHALL:
 I feel how?
PARTICIPANT F:
 “I feel that the food is assuaging me in a way that …”
MARSHALL:
 “I feel discouraged …?”
PARTICIPANT F:
 “I feel discouraged that I am not getting my needs met.”
MARSHALL:
 “I feel discouraged because I really want to get clear on what my
needs are so I can meet them.”
PARTICIPANT F:
 Yes, right.
MARSHALL:
 “So I want to continue doing what I did last night with Bill on the
phone. Now when I feel this urge, I want to stop and ask myself, ‘What do Ireally need?’” You see how we have translated the judgment, “I’m a
compulsive overeater” into how I feel, what my unmet needs are, and what I
want to do about it. That’s how we speak NVC with ourselves.
 “When I eat because I want something else …” That’s the first part, the
observation of what she sees herself doing. Second, she checks her feeling: “I
feel discouraged.” Number three: “My unmet need is to be in touch with what
I really want so I have a chance of getting it.” And finally the fourth thing is,
“What do I want to do about this to make my most wonderful dream come
true? When I start finding myself wanting to eat, I stop and ask myself, ‘What
is it that I really need?’ Then I get in touch with what I really need.”
 Now she is not thinking of what she is; she’s more in touch with a process
that moves. That may not solve the problem, but she’ll find out by doing it,
because she isn’t thinking of what she is. She is thinking of what she is feeling
and wanting and what she is going to do about that. As an NVCer, never think
of yourself as a “worthwhile person.” If you do, you will spend a good amount
of time questioning whether you are a “worthless person.” NVCers don’t
spend time thinking about what kind of person they are; they think moment by
moment—not “What am I?” but “What is the life that is going on in me at this
moment?”
Figuring Out What We Want
PARTICIPANT G:
 Sometimes we get into doing everything ourselves, and we are
not in touch with how good it may feel to have someone else do for us. While
you were talking to Participant F, I thought how nice it was to be in touch with
what one needed. Sometimes I just don’t know what I need, and I get
discouraged.
MARSHALL:
 Most of us don’t know what we want. It’s only after we get
something and it messes up our life that we know it wasn’t what we wanted.
I’ll say I want an ice cream cone, get one, eat it, then feel terrible and realize
that wasn’t what I wanted.
 To an NVCer, it’s not a matter of knowing what is right or wrong. To use
the language of life requires courage and choosing what you want based more
on intuition than on thinking. It’s being in touch with your unmet needs and
choosing what you want to do about them.
PARTICIPANT G:
 I find that I’m a big doer.
MARSHALL:
 You just labeled yourself.
PARTICIPANT G:
 What I mean is that I run around wanting to connect with peopleby doing something for them. Sometimes I run across people who don’t
expect that from me, and it feels so good. But then I start to wonder whether
they would really like to receive but just won’t let me in.
When Others Won’t Receive
MARSHALL:
 That’s probably because all their lives they have had people doing
things for them and then sending them a bill. It’s scary, so now they don’t trust
you either. They don’t realize there is another kind of giving, that there are
people who give not to take care of them but who give from the heart.
PARTICIPANT G:
 I’m sad that I haven’t been able to clearly communicate that
what I want is to give from the heart. Perhaps I can say to them, “It makes me
sad that you don’t give me the opportunity to give of myself.”
MARSHALL:
 If you stop there, then we’re back to the man on the train.
PARTICIPANT G:
 How about if I add, “Are you willing to tell me if you are willing
to give me that opportunity?”
MARSHALL:
 Okay, I’m glad that you got that part in. You feel sad because you
would really like the opportunity to give to them, to have them receive and
feel comfortable with your gift.
PARTICIPANT G:
 Right, it’s really simple.
Are We Arguing?
PARTICIPANT H:
 I feel frustrated when I try to talk with my girlfriend, because she
tells me she doesn’t want to argue. Any time I try to express my feelings and
needs, she thinks I’m arguing. She says she doesn’t want to argue in front of
her kid (who is there all the time).
MARSHALL:
 Oh, yes, that’s a rough one. If people see us as trying to argue, then
they think that we are trying to win. It’s hard to convince them otherwise,
because people with a judgmental mentality have little idea how you can
express feelings and wants without somebody being wrong.
PARTICIPANT H:
 But the hard part is she thinks I am arguing even if I try to
empathize with her. When I try to guess her feelings and wants, she sees it as
“arguing.”
MARSHALL:
 Because she doesn’t want you to judge her. She’s afraid once she
acknowledges what you say or allows herself to become vulnerable, you are
going to zap her and tell her she’s wrong for having those feelings and wants.
PARTICIPANT H:
 Well, according to her, the reason that she really doesn’t like todeal with this kind of stuff is because she just wants the nice parts of life, not
all that other heavy stuff.
MARSHALL:
 Yes, life is so full of unpleasant stuff as it is, so why deal with
anything unpleasant?
PARTICIPANT H:
 Yes, right.
MARSHALL:
 That’s exactly what my dad said at the first workshop that he came
to. It’s a lovable message, if you look at it that way. But when he first got clear
from everybody in the group what a gift it would be to feel pain from their
father if their father could just express it—to think of his feelings and needs as
a gift—it was a mind-boggler for him. Since that time, there have been a lot of
radical changes in him.
 Certainly many people think that to talk about painful feelings is a negative,
unpleasant experience, because they associate it with guilt games, punishment,
and all kinds of other stuff. They haven’t seen it as part of an NVC dance and
how beautiful it can be to talk about those feelings. When I wrote the first
edition of my book, I put in a list of positive feelings and a list of negative
feelings. Then I noticed how people think negative feelings are negative. Since
that’s not what I wanted, in my next edition I put the words “positive” and
“negative” in quotes, but that still didn’t seem to help. Now I write, “feelings
present when our needs are being meet” and “feelings present when our needs
are not being met” to show how valuable they both are, because they are both
talking about life.
 So we have some work to do to convince your friend about this.
MARSHALL, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Look, I don’t want to argue. There is enough
unpleasantness. Why can’t we have a pleasant evening and watch television
and enjoy one another?
PARTICIPANT H, AS NVCER:
 So you’re feeling irritated …
MARSHALL, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 There you go again! Always talking about feelings!
PARTICIPANT H, AS HIMSELF:
 [Silence.] Uh-oh.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 [Addressing laughter in the audience.] So you like
seeing this rascal suffer?!
MARSHALL, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 I can’t stand it when you do this! [Then she goes into
the other room and slams the door.]
PARTICIPANT H, AS HIMSELF:
 It’s more likely she would throw a lot of words at
me, and I would just get knocked down for the count. [Laughter.]
MARSHALL:
 The ten count! Okay, so you play her and come on with those words.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 So you really want to talk …
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Stop! Stop! Don’t bring this stuff up to me,
because I don’t like it.MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I’m feeling very discouraged because I …
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Why can’t you just be the nice guy, the one I
enjoy having a good time with? Let’s be loving and forget about this stuff!
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 So you would like our evening to be light and easy, just
enjoying one another?
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Yeah.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I like that part of our relationship too, and I find that
comes when we can deal with everything. You see, I want to laugh all my
laughter and cry all my tears, and if I cut off half of it, then I find that the
other half goes too. That’s important. Can you tell me what you heard?
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 You are starting in again about feelings and
getting depressed. I don’t want to hear about it!
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 So, you’re really afraid of getting down into those
depressed feelings and want to stay out of them?
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Yeah, and besides, tonight, with my kid around, I
don’t want us to argue.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Are you afraid that we are going to fight?
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Please stop!
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 How would you feel about our continuing this when he is
not here?
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Yeah, you can come and meet me for lunch if
you want to.
 [At lunch.]
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I’d like to show you a way that feelings could be very
positive, regardless of which feelings they are.
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 I don’t want to hear that stuff. Have you been
taking those workshops again? [Laughter.] I want to concentrate on the
positive things of life. I don’t want to bring up hard feelings. I just want to
enjoy the good stuff.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 You really want to enjoy life and not get stuck down in
some hole talking about negative stuff?
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Yeah, I don’t want that stuff in my life. Do you
know what happened to Emily today? She went to pick up her boy and
couldn’t find him anywhere. At first she thought he’d gone home with their
neighbor. But then she ran into one of the kids, and he told her that he saw her
son leaving school at lunchtime with a man, a guy he’d never seen. Well, you
can imagine how Emily was, especially after that thing that happened to her
sister’s kid two years ago. Remember? I think I told you about the time her
sister was visiting and—
 
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Excuse me for interrupting.Are you saying that it’s a scary experience to hear things like that happening?
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 Do you see what I did? The girlfriend was using more
words than I wanted to hear, and my energy started to drop. So I interrupted
NVC style to connect with the feelings behind her words in that moment. I am
not trying to take the floor away from the other person but to bring life back
into the conversation. As I mentioned, my guess is that if I’m bored, so is the
other person, so this would be a service to them as well as to me.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 You are telling me that it was a real scary experience for
you?
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Yeah, he might run into the street and—
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 It really scares you to see just how close we all are to
getting the life taken out of us at every moment.
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Don’t start that stuff on me again. He was just
out in the street, and then his mom came after him again—
 
MARSHALL, AS
NVCER:
 Excuse me, excuse me for interrupting. I’m feeling really impatient,
because I’m not getting the connection in our conversations that I would like.
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Okay, but I have to go anyway. I’ve got to go and
pick up my kid now. School is going to be out—
 
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I’d
like you to tell me whether you have any interest in continuing our
relationship.
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 Sure, you know that I really love you and want to
be with you.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I really don’t know how to continue our relationship,
because there are certain things that I need in a relationship that I’m not
getting, such as the ability to talk about certain feelings. If that is different
from what you want in a relationship, then I would just like to get that clear so
that we can have an NVC breakup.
PARTICIPANT H, AS GIRLFRIEND:
 [Suddenly speaking NVC.] So you’re really
feeling frustrated because you want to express your feelings and needs?
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 That’s what I want, but I don’t know how you need to be
in a personal relationship.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 There are people who want to keep things at that level,
and they have a right to find somebody who wants to stay there with them.
But I have never found anybody who really did. Often they have the erroneous
idea that I want them to be associating with things in the past that are painful.
Usually I am able to show them the difference between what they think I am
talking about and what I am really talking about. With this particular
girlfriend, I might have to be very clever to get that in, because she wasn’t
giving me much space.Hearing No
PARTICIPANT I:
 I know that NVC is about figuring out my needs and requesting
what I want, but that doesn’t work with my boyfriend. If I start asking him for
what I want, he’ll just get really angry and huffy. Then I’ll tell him to act
decently, or maybe I’ll wish I hadn’t mentioned any of it in the first place.
MARSHALL:
 It’s amazing how it just turns people into beasts when they hear that
word. They beast themselves, and they beast the speaker, and it’s a very small
word—only two letters. Can anybody guess what the word is?
LOTS OF PARTICIPANTS:
 
No!
MARSHALL:
 Yeah. It’s amazing how people are so frightened of this word that
they are afraid to ask for what they want, because what if the other person
says no? I tell them it’s not the 
no
 that bothers them, and they say, “Yes, it is;
I’m so afraid of it.” The problem is never the 
no
; it’s what we tell ourselves
when the person says no. If we tell ourselves that it is a rejection, that’s a
problem, because it hurts. Rejection, ugh. Of course, if we have NVC ears on
we would never hear 
no.
 We would be aware that a 
no
 is just a sloppy
expression of what a person wants. We don’t hear the slop; we just hear the
want. It takes some practice.
MARSHALL, ADDRESSING PARTICIPANT I:
 So how did this boyfriend say no to you?
PARTICIPANT I:
 Well, I asked for something, and he said, 
“No!”
 And so I said—
MARSHALL:
 With that kind of energy already, we know what the problem is.
He heard what, folks?
PARTICIPANTS:
 Demand.
MARSHALL:
 He heard a demand. Whenever people say no like that, they’re
scared to death that their autonomy is going to be taken away. They’re afraid
that if they really hear what the other person wants, they’re going to get
sucked in and have to do it, whether they want to or not. So when people say
no like that, we know they didn’t hear our request. It has nothing to do with
us; it’s obviously not a rejection, because they didn’t even hear the request—
they heard demand.
PARTICIPANT I:
 So at this point, I tried guessing what he was feeling, and he said,
“I just want you to understand, to get it. I don’t want to play this game, and I
don’t have to. I just want you to get the fact that the answer is no.”
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Just realize how scared I am about having my
autonomy taken away.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 It’s so very precious for us to be able to do things when
we choose to do them—not because somebody we love has to have it orbecause they are going to freak out or because they are going to keep talking
at us until we do. People are very scared of spending so much of their lives
having to give when it’s not from the heart. So they’re very reactive. He says,
“Just get it! Just understand. I just do not want to do this today. I just need to
protect my autonomy.” From the tone of your boyfriend’s voice when he says,
“I just want you to get it,” he has a serious case of the sick-of-dependency,
not-yet-autonomous blues. So what do you say to him next?
PARTICIPANT I:
 I just rolled over and went to sleep. [Laughter.] Well, I kind of
yelled and screamed, “No, no, no!” I got angry, really fierce, and said, “I’m
very upset.” And he said, “Oh, good, you’ve got life in you.” [Laughter.] And
then he got silent.
MARSHALL:
 You know that he was really scared. He doesn’t feel he can protect
himself against you. You were very tense, and he knows to withdraw and
protect himself.
PARTICIPANT I:
 What can I do in this case? Just go “under the hat” with myself
[give oneself empathy]?
MARSHALL:
 The most important thing, of course, is for you not to think that this
has anything to do with you.
PARTICIPANT I:
 Yeah, I was okay with that.
MARSHALL:
 Then that’s about the best I know to do in a situation when
somebody says no to my needs: making sure I don’t think there is anything
wrong with my needs. I need to really work fast because, with that intensity
and pain, I could make a mistake and think there is something wrong with my
needs if they can scare a person that much.
PARTICIPANT I:
 Well, I just would have liked to have heard what he wanted.
MARSHALL:
 He is all tied up in protecting his autonomy—that’s what he wants.
He needs space to just feel safe in the relationship, to know he’s not going to
get sucked into something before he is ready.
PARTICIPANT I:
 So I can kind of give myself empathy silently. Keep quiet.
MARSHALL:
 Yeah. Just be aware that if he’s like most men—if my wife is right—
he’ll need about three incarnations to get past that. [Laughter.]
 So in the meantime, go and get some women friends and just don’t
aggravate yourself. My wife once said about the best one-liner I’ve ever heard;
she said to me, “You could read demands into a rock.” [Laughter.] I said,
“Guilty as charged.”
Do You Want to Hear This?PARTICIPANT I:
 When he’s having his sick-of-dependency and not-yetautonomous
blues, I get really desperate because I want him to know that, in fact, I can’t
make him do anything, so he doesn’t need to worry about that at all. If he
could just trust that, we could have a lot more fun. Do you hear what my pain
is?
MARSHALL:
 Only when he feels that you can fully empathize with how
frightening it is for him to be in a close relationship—and that might take a
long time—then, maybe, he can start to understand how frustrating it is for
you to have needs and not be able to express them without having him turn
them into demands.
PARTICIPANT I:
 Is there some way I can effectively communicate to him how
much I want him to understand that I can’t make him do anything?
MARSHALL:
 You can try. This person will hear anything as a demand, even—or
perhaps in particular—your silence, so you might as well have some fun
screaming. If you keep your needs hidden inside, he’s going to carry that as a
very heavy burden. Screaming what you have to say a few thousand times
might get him to understand.
PARTICIPANT I:
 I was concerned about doing the inner work on my own without
saying anything to him, because he may be thinking I am avoiding the issue
by not talking about it.
MARSHALL:
 Yes, how painful it is not to be able to voice our needs. There’s
nothing wrong with screaming, “I would like you to tell me what I have to do
or say for you to trust that I never want to get you into anything that is painful
for you,” while also empathizing with just how frightened he may be having
grown up in a family where he’s been told he’s wrong. He has been through
all kinds of games, so he needs a lot of time and patience to gain that trust. I
don’t think it’s going to happen just by your telling him that you won’t ever
make him do anything. He needs a lot of empathy due to the scare from his
prior experiences.
Expressing Feelings and Needs
MARSHALL:
 Who’s got another one?
PARTICIPANT J:
 It’s a telephone call from my boyfriend. He says, “Hi, I’m not
going to be able to come today. My daughter’s school is getting out at 1:30,
and I want to spend quality time with you, and I will be nervous if we get
together.”
MARSHALL:
 And then you say?PARTICIPANT J:
 I was able to identify my feelings. “I have pain in my heart.”
That’s what I said.
MARSHALL:
 “I have pain in my heart.”
PARTICIPANT J:
 Yeah, but I wasn’t able to identify my needs.
MARSHALL:
 But you weren’t able to say what your needs were, and your timing
was a bit judgmental. This person needs empathy, and the first thing they hear
is “pain in your heart.” So we already have a nice fight about to start here.
PARTICIPANT J:
 When I said I had pain in my heart, he asked, “Why?”
MARSHALL:
 I’ve asked people in several countries, “What are the hardest
messages for you to hear and really feel safe?” “Why” questions top the list. If
you really want to scare people, ask “why” questions. “Why?”
PARTICIPANT J:
 Silence, I said nothing. Then he listed a whole bunch of other
reasons why he wasn’t able to come.
MARSHALL:
 This poor suicidal guy. He doesn’t realize that when he tries to
explain and justify, it just sounds like an attack. So then what?
PARTICIPANT J:
 I said, “I have pain in my heart, and I have to think about that.”
And then I thought, “I am going to call some of my NVC friends.”
MARSHALL:
 Ah, now there’s a smart thing to do! Okay, so if I understand this,
you really wanted to be with this person.
PARTICIPANT J:
 Yes.
MARSHALL:
 And this person’s needs were in conflict with yours. This person was
saying, “I have other needs right now, other than to meet your needs.”
PARTICIPANT J:
 Right, and logically I could understand that, but in my heart …
MARSHALL:
 In your head you could understand it, but you have the pain in your
heart because you heard what?
PARTICIPANT J:
 I heard, “I don’t want to be with you.”
MARSHALL:
 Yes, you heard a rejection. That’s how to make life really miserable.
When somebody’s needs are in conflict with ours and that person says, “I’d
like to do something else right now rather than meet your needs,” you hear it
as, “I don’t want to be with you.” You have nicer language; you say “pain in
my heart.” I must confess, I have been known to wear judging ears when I
hear a 
no
 myself. It’s very hard to put on NVC ears when you hear a 
no.
 Yes, by all means, let’s learn how to put on NVC ears in such a situation,
because that can save us a lot of misery. If we hear another person’s needs
being different from ours as a rejection, we will soon be rejected. Who wants
to be around people who read rejection each time your needs are in conflict
with theirs? That gets very heavy very quickly. So unless we learn to put on
NVC ears, we will, in fact, drive the other person away. I realize that this is
not always easy, but we need to learn to put on NVC ears. [Marshall puts on apair of fuzzy NVC ears. The audience chuckles. He responds to the laughter
by saying:] I feel very hurt. [More laughter.]
PARTICIPANT J:
 Your ears aren’t working then. [Lots more laughter.]
MARSHALL:
 Yes, these are faulty ears, obviously. I need to get another pair.
 Now, as soon as I put on these ears, a miracle takes place: rejection
vanishes from the earth. I never hear a 
no.
 I never hear a 
don’t want.
Judgments and criticism vanish from the earth. All I hear is the truth, which to
an NVC-speaking person is this: “All that other people are ever expressing are
their feelings and needs. The only things that people are ever saying, no matter
how they are expressing it, are how they are and what they would like to make
life even better. When people say no, that’s just a poor way of letting us know
what they really want. We don’t want to make it worse by hearing a rejection;
we hear what they want.”
 Some of you have heard me tell about the woman who said to her husband,
“I don’t want you spending so much time at work.” Then she got furious with
him when he signed up for a bowling league. [Laughter.] She had told him
what she didn’t want, and he didn’t have NVC ears on. He didn’t know how to
hear what she did want. Of course, it would have made it easier if she had said
what she did want. But if he had been wearing NVC ears, when she said, “I
don’t want you spending so much time at work,” he would have said:
HUSBAND:
 Oh, so you’re concerned about my well-being, and you want me to
get more recreation?
 
WIFE:
 Not on your life. You have spent only two nights in the past six months
with the children and me.
 
HUSBAND:
 Ah, so you’re really disappointed in how much time we spend
together, and you’d like me to spend at least one night a week with you
and the children?
 
WIFE:
 Exactly.
 You see, with NVC ears, we never hear what people don’t want. We try to
help them get clear about what they do want. Being clear only about what we
don’t want is a dangerous phenomenon. It gets us into all kinds of confusion.
 When we are clear on what we do want from other people, especially when
we are clear about what we want their reasons to be in doing something, then
it becomes clear to us that we can never get our needs met through any kind of
threats or punitive measures. Whether we are parents, teachers, or whatever,
we never get our needs met by punishment. No one who is the least bit
conscious is going to want anyone to do anything for us out of fear, guilt, or
shame. We’re NVCoriented enough to see into the future, to see that any timeanyone does anything out of fear, guilt, or shame, everybody loses. So we
need to put the NVC ears on now and give this person some empathy. Let’s try
it again.
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 I have a real conflict. I would really like to be with
you when I can be conscious and give you my full attention, but today my
attention is distracted by my daughter.
PARTICIPANT J, AS HERSELF:
 Do you want me to be an NVCer?
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 Yeah, put these ears on. [He hands Participant J a pair of
NVC ears, which she dons.]
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 I’m really disappointed.
MARSHALL:
 No, no. This poor person needs empathy.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 So, you’d really like to spend some quality time with
me, when you can be fully in my presence without distraction, but today you
need to attend to your daughter because she’s getting out of school early?
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Yes, thank you for giving me that empathy. You see, I
have this real fear that if I don’t always meet the needs of the person I care for,
then that person is going to take it as a rejection, and I’m going to be rejected
and abandoned. So it’s very terrifying for me to tell you that my needs are in
conflict with yours. I’ve had terrible experiences like that in my background—
when I don’t do what everybody else wants, I don’t get the love that I want.
It’s just terrifying for me to tell you that my needs are in conflict with yours. I
was afraid you’d hear, “I don’t want to be with you.”
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 You want some more empathy?
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Yeah, I want some more empathy.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 I guess you were scared that you were not going to be
able to spend time with me today because you’re feeling a need to attend to
your daughter. And you’re afraid that by telling me that, I may think that you
don’t want to spend time with me. In the past, you’ve had many experiences
and times when you wanted to fill the needs of others you care for, but when
you had a conflict or hadn’t been able to do that, they heard that you didn’t
want to spend time with them. When they felt rejected, they punished you, and
then you felt guilt and shame. They judged you, and you felt even more guilty
and scared.
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Yes, yes—it feels so good to get this empathy— the
heck with my daughter, I’m coming over! [Laughter and applause.] Now I can
even hear you when you start to tell me about the pain in your heart, because I
got my empathy first.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER
: I’m wondering if you’d like to hear how I’m feeling
about this.MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Yeah, I’d like to hear how you are feeling.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 I’m feeling really disappointed.
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Oh, I’m sorry; I didn’t mean to disappoint you.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 Now watch out. He has learned suicidal tendencies to
take responsibility for other people’s feelings. As soon as she said she was
disappointed, he went on alert. Without NVC, when people hear somebody in
pain, immediately they feel that they have done something wrong and now
they have to do something about it. And so this person is doing the number
one thing that people unfamiliar with NVC do: apologize. You know that there
is a judgment coming soon when you hear these words: “I’m sorry.” Then he
repeats a whole lot of excuses that you don’t want to hear about why it’s so
important for him to be with the daughter today, leaving you in all that pain,
not getting any empathy.
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 I’m sorry, I didn’t mean to disappoint you, but this is
the only day, blah, blah, blah, excuses, excuses, justification, 
et cetera
. Phew!
[Laughter.]
PARTICIPANT J, AS HERSELF:
 Is this empathy time?
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 No, scream in NVC! You gave him empathy; now get
empathy back.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 Okay. Well, I’m having a need to share my feelings
with you right now.
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Yes, it’s important that you do.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 What I’d like to do right now is tell you what I’m
feeling, and then when I’m done, maybe you could tell me back what I’ve
said?
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Oh yes, I have a very bad habit; I don’t listen very
well. I’ve never been able to listen too well. My mother was not a very good
listener either, and, uh, you know … [Laughter.]
PARTICIPANT J, AS HERSELF:
 Next time will I talk to his mom?
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 No, just scream in NVC.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 I hear that you have some pain around this.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 No, don’t give him even that much empathy; just scream
in NVC.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 I have a need to share my feelings and my needs about
this with you, and I would really like you to listen to what I have to say. And
afterward I’d like you to tell me what I said. Okay?
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Yeah. [Marshall shrugs his shoulders and rolls his
eyes. The audience laughs.]
PARTICIPANT J, AS HERSELF:
 Did you talk to him ahead of time? [More laughter.]MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 I’ve even got his expressions down pat!
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 I’m feeling really disappointed when I hear that you’re
not going to be able to spend the day with me.
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 Yes, but …
MARSHALL, PLAYING NVC COACH TO BOYFRIEND:
 Shh, shh, just hear her out.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 Sometimes you need an emergency NVC coach to help
out.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 I was really looking forward to spending the day with
you because I enjoy your company so much, and I was needing to see you.
 [Marshall enacts dialogue between judging puppet (boyfriend) and NVC
puppet (coach).]
 
NVC COACH:
 Can you tell her back what she said?
 
BOYFRIEND:
 Yes, I understand how she feels.
 
NVC COACH:
 Could you just say what she feels?
 
BOYFRIEND:
 No, she’s right—she has every right to feel that way. It was
terrible of me. I should never have made the promise if I knew that I
might not have been able to do it. It was terrible of me. I just feel terribly
guilty.
 
NVC COACH:
 Are you aware that when you hear what she said as a judgment of
yourself, that it is a further violation of her?
 
BOYFRIEND:
 Huh?
 
NVC COACH:
 When you’re hearing what another person says as meaning you
did something wrong, that’s a further violation of the other person,
because then not only is she not getting the understanding that she needs,
but she also gets the feeling that her honesty creates problems for you. It’s
going to be harder for her to be honest in the future if she tries to tell you
what’s going on with her and you think you did something wrong.
 
BOYFRIEND:
 But I’m not wearing NVC ears; I can’t hear anything except that I
did something wrong.
 
NVC COACH:
 You want some NVC ears?
 
BOYFRIEND:
 Yes! [Laughter as Marshall puts NVC ears on the judging
boyfriend puppet.]
 
BOYFRIEND:
 So you’re really feeling disappointed because I …
 
NVC COACH:
 No, you didn’t have the ears on straight. No, she’s not feeling
disappointed because of such and such. Quit taking responsibility for her
feelings. Just hear what is going on in her.
MARSHALL, AS NVC BOYFRIEND:
 So you feel disappointed because you were
looking forward to this, and you really wanted to spend that time with me.PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 Yes!
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 [Hearing with new NVC ears.] It’s something you
were really looking forward to.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 Yeah. I really enjoyed hearing you say that!
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 It really feels good when you can get that empathy?
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 Yes, it feels really good.
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 And you don’t want me to feel like a worm?
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 No, I don’t want you to feel like a worm.
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 You just needed this empathy.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 Yeah!
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 And that’s all I have to do?
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 [With new softness in her voice.] Yes, and I’m feeling
really grateful to you for hearing that.
MARSHALL, AS BOYFRIEND:
 That’s amazing! I always thought that I had to do
everything that everyone else wanted me to do in order to be loved. The idea
that people just want my empathy and then my honesty— this is astonishing!
Thank you for staying with me. I’ll try to keep these ears on all the time.
PARTICIPANT J, AS NVCER:
 I’d enjoy that!
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 The first thing to do when we start to get angry or
defensive is to recognize that we didn’t hear the other person. What breaks us
out of these fights is our consciousness. If we hear anything but a gift in the
other person’s message, then we didn’t hear that person. You have to notice
when your NVC ears have fallen off. Anger is a wonderful clue; it’s like a
wake-up call to an NVCer. As soon as I get angry or defensive or hear an
attack or demand, I know that I didn’t hear the other person. Instead of
connecting to what’s going on in them, I’m up in my head judging that they’re
wrong in some way. If I’m using NVC, I know to shut up as quickly as
possible, put my NVC ears on, and listen to myself. I’ve wounded myself if I
have judging ears. How do I do this?
 I listen to myself. I give myself empathy. I see how much pain I’ve created
for myself by putting on my judging ears and hearing all of that. I notice that
this has happened, and then I shut up and enjoy the show going on in my head.
It’s just like watching a movie. [Laughter.]
Reassurance
PARTICIPANT K:
 I need to know the difference between empathizing with
someone by saying, “It sounds like you’re scared and need some reassurance”and actually reassuring them. What if they say, “Yes, I do need some
reassurance”?
MARSHALL:
 If they say they want reassurance, and I can give it to them willingly,
there’s no problem. The problem is giving that reassurance when they want
empathy. For example, one time my oldest daughter was looking in the mirror,
and she said, “I’m as ugly as a pig.” I said, “You’re the most gorgeous
creature God ever put on the face of this earth.” She said, “Daddy!” and she
stormed out and slammed the door. I was being judgmental there. She wanted
empathy, and in order to meet my own needs, I tried to fix her.
 What did I do? I went into the other room after judging myself a bit, saying,
“You preach about this every day of the year, and then when it happens, you
forget. You forget the Buddha’s advice: ‘Don’t fix it, just be there.’” After that,
I went to her and said,
 
MARSHALL:
 I’m guessing you needed to hear how
disappointed you were with your appearance and not my reassurances.
 
DAUGHTER:
 That’s right. You’re always try to fix everything. [Laughter.]
 
MARSHALL:
 Guilty as charged.
Talking About It in Public
PARTICIPANT L:
 Sometimes I feel like I’m taking care of my mate’s feelings. In
the past I’d sometimes say something that he considered private or personal to
another couple or in a group. I’ve since gotten clear on the difference between
his stuff and my stuff, but occasionally there is a fine line between what I can
and can’t say. So I’m wondering, when we are in a group of people, when
would it be appropriate and not “codependent” to ask him, “Is it okay if I talk
about this?” Sometimes when I ask and he says no or says I shouldn’t have
said something, I feel angry and censored. Do you get my question?
MARSHALL:
 I think I do. Let me see. You’re saying that sometimes it’s not clear
to you when your mate is comfortable with your talking about things with
other people and when he’s not.
PARTICIPANT L:
 Yeah.
MARSHALL:
 You’ve put your question in a non-NVC form and are heading in a
direction that is dangerous. I cleaned it up for you and translated it into NVC.
In the book 
The Revolution in Psychiatry,
 Ernest Becker, an anthropologist,
suggested that depression results from cognitively arrested alternatives. He
meant that by asking questions of the sort you started with, we fill our head
with unanswerable questions. “Is it okay?” “Is it appropriate?” Those
questions usually cannot be answered, and we end up spinning in our heads.Notice that I translated those questions. You’re saying that sometimes your
partner is uncomfortable with some things you say. It doesn’t mean it’s not
okay for you to say those things. It doesn’t mean that it’s inappropriate. It just
means he doesn’t like it. You’re just asking your partner, “I’m not clear what
those things are. Can you give me an example of some of the things that you
would like or wouldn’t like for me to say?”
MARSHALL, AS PARTNER:
 Well, obviously I don’t want you to say inappropriate
things to other people. [Laughter.]
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 We need to get clear on the difference between
emotional slavery, obnoxiousness, and liberation. Emotional slavery is as far
from NVC as you can get—it’s when people think they have to do everything
that others think is appropriate, right, normal. These people spend all their
lives thinking they have to please others and to guess what others think is
appropriate. This is a heavy load. For example, someone comes home upset
about something; it doesn’t make any difference what it is.
 
PARTNER:
 I’m upset about everything.
 
JUDGING PERSON:
 Oh, here, eat some chicken soup.
MARSHALL:
 You see, it doesn’t matter what it is. As soon as a person is in pain,
then the other thinks they have to scurry around and take care of that person.
Then they come to an NVC workshop where maybe I’m not totally coherent
in explaining how we are not responsible for other people’s feelings—I fail to
make clear what we are responsible for. So they go home from the workshop,
and when their partner says, “I’m still upset about A,” they respond, “Well,
that’s your problem; I’m not responsible for your feelings.” [Laughter.]
 
PARTNER:
 Where did you learn that?
 
NVC PARTICIPANT:
 At an NVC workshop.
 
PARTNER:
 I’m going to go kill those people!
MARSHALL:
 The NVC concept is: No, we are not responsible for other people’s
feelings, but we’re conscious that we don’t have to keep rebelling against
them, saying things like, “I’m not responsible for your feelings.” We can just
hear what others are feeling and not lose our center. We can hear what they
want and give them empathy, but we don’t have to do what they want. We
make it clear that we need empathy, not that we need them to give up or give
in. To hear and respect what they need doesn’t mean we must do what they
ask. Does that answer your question, or did I go astray? You need to get very
clear on what you need. Without NVC, we say, “May I?” “Is it okay?”
NVCers never want approval from other people. NVCers never give that
power away and have other people tell them what to do.
 This is what we’d say in NVC: “Here’s what I want. I’d like to know where
you stand in relationship to that. I want to know your needs as well as mine—
not because when I hear your needs, I am going to give mine up or give in. I
am conscious that I cannot benefit at your expense. Your needs are equally as
important to me as my needs. And I’m clear that doesn’t ever mean having to
give up my needs.”
I Lose Myself Around You
PARTICIPANT M:
 Are you ready for another one? She said, “I can’t be in a long-
term relationship. I lose myself around you. I’m not emotionally mature
enough. I can see now that I was undergoing aberrant behavior in getting
involved and agreeing to your wanting a long-term relationship. Something
was wrong with me that led me to think that I could so quickly fall in love.” I
told her, “I’d still like to be your friend.” And she said, “I don’t know what to
say.”
MARSHALL:
 Yes, yes. This person has been taught non-NVC concepts of love,
such as, “If you really love somebody, you deny your needs and take care of
them.” As soon as people like this get into a close relationship—a loving
relationship—they turn judgmental. Until then, they’re lovely; they’re
wonderful. These are the most dangerous judges, because they’re really judges
in NVC clothing. [Laughter.] You see, in the early stage of the relationship,
they are giving from the heart; they enjoy giving. It’s easy; they don’t think of
it until they pass the line.
 What is the line? It’s when people fear that they’ve “made a commitment.”
If you really want to scare them to death, talk about commitment, or use the
word 
serious.
 As soon as they think it’s a “serious relationship” or the word
love
 comes up—“I love this person”—you’re going to get killed. The moment
they define it as a serious relationship, that’s when they feel like they are
responsible for your feelings. For to show love, they have to deny themselves
and do for you.
 All of that is behind the statements “I lose myself in a relationship with
you. I can’t stand it. I see your pain, and I lose me, and I need to get away
from it all.” At least they are taking responsibility for it. At a more primitivelevel, they would have put it all on you: “You’re too dependent. You’re too
needy.” That’s seriously deranged. They are not aware of their own internal
dynamic.
MARSHALL, AS PARTNER:
 I’m really scared to be in the relationship because I just
close down. As soon as I see that you have any need or any pain, I just can’t
tell you the pain that I feel, and then I start to feel like I’m in prison. I feel like
I’m being smothered, and so I just have to get out of this relationship as soon
as possible.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 As an NVCer, I have to do a lot of work with that, but I
don’t think there is something wrong with my needs or my love. If I did, that
would make a bad situation doubly bad. I need not take responsibility for this.
I need to truly hear what you are saying.
 So you’re in a panic. It’s very hard for you to hold on to the deep caring and
love that we’ve had without making of it responsibility and duty and
obligation, closing down your own freedom, and feeling like you have to take
care of me.
PARTICIPANT M, TAKING OVER AS PARTNER:
 Exactly! It’s just like a prison. I can
hardly breathe.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 As soon as you hear my pain or my feelings, it’s as if your
life stops.
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 Yeah! [Sighs.]
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I’m really glad you are telling me this. Would it be safer if
we defined ourselves as friends rather than lovers?
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 No … I do this with friends, I do it with anybody I
care for. I did this with my dog once. [Laughter.]
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Gosh, I’m in such a dilemma here. I’d like to express my
pain in relationship to that, but then if I express my pain, I’m afraid you’ll
freak.
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 Yes, I will. I will. As soon as you express any pain,
I will think that I have done something wrong and that I have to do something
about it. My life is over; I have to take care of you.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Then to myself I say, “Wow, how painful it is for me not
to be able to get any empathy. To have someone receive my feelings and needs
—all that is alive in me—that I would like to be a gift to someone; turning my
needs into demands is painful to me. I do not know how to get what I need
from this person. Let me try one more time to see if I can get empathy from
this person.”
 Would you be willing to try to hear just one message from me without
taking responsibility for it?PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 What do you mean?
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I’d like to tell you a feeling and a need and have you hear
only that and nothing else. Not to hear that you have to do anything about it.
Not to hear that you did anything wrong. Just repeat back what you hear me
say. Would you be willing to do that?
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 I’ll try.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I feel so sad …
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 I’m sorry. [Laughter.]
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Please don’t. Just wait, hold on, and repeat what I say. I
feel sad because I would like my feelings and my needs to be gifts to you and
not a threat. Could you tell me what you heard me say?
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 That I shouldn’t react so strongly.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 No, I’m really not trying to tell you what you should or
shouldn’t do. I have a feeling and a need—just concentrate on that. I feel very
sad because I would like my feelings and my needs to be a gift to you and not
such a threat. Can you tell me what you heard me say?
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 That I make you sad.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 You don’t make me sad; my needs make me sad. Can you
just hear that?
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 Say it again.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I feel very sad because I would really like it if my feelings
and needs could be a gift to you and not a threat.
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 You feel sad because I—
 
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 No!
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 Because you?
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Thank you.
PARTICIPANT M, AS PARTNER:
 Because you would like your feelings and needs to
be a gift to me and not a threat.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I’m grateful that you heard that. Go in peace, and I hope
some day you can come back and enjoy me.
Making a Request
PARTICIPANT M:
 But there’s the next sentence. [Laughter.]
MARSHALL:
 What’s that?
PARTICIPANT M:
 I want to say, “I feel scared; I need to feel we are still connected
because we were connected. It doesn’t necessarily matter how we are
connected. I don’t need you as a special partner, but I still need to feel we are
connected and that we are friends.”MARSHALL:
 That’s wonderful as far as you’ve gone, but if you stop there, it’s not
NVC. What you’ve stated is your feeling and your unmet need to still
maintain contact with her, but you didn’t make clear at the very end exactly
what you want the other person to do. For a person who hears the way this one
does, that will be fuel to the fire. When you say to a person without NVC ears,
“Be a friend,” and you don’t make it clear what you are wanting from them,
they’ll read in again: “You want to smother me. You want me to be your
slave.” You must be very concrete with people who don’t speak NVC. You
cannot say, “I want you to love me. I want your understanding. I need you to
listen. I need you to be a friend.” Concretely, what exactly do you want this
person to do to be your friend?
PARTICIPANT M:
 “I would like to call you at least once a month and check in on
how you are and let you know how I am.”
MARSHALL:
 What you need to say right now is, “I’d like you to tell me if you
would be willing to have me call once a month to check in.”
MARSHALL, AS PARTNER:
 For how many minutes?
PARTICIPANT M:
 Oh, about thirty minutes on a Sunday.
MARSHALL, AS PARTNER:
 Yes.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 We need to be that concrete with NVC.
Dealing with Sexism or Racism
PARTICIPANT N:
 [Speaking softly.] I know someone who said that when a woman
gets married, she turns into a bitch.
MARSHALL:
 Now, without NVC, we would quickly interpret that as a sexist
remark. However, with such a thought in our head, we lose the power to get
this person to be more sensitive to our needs. As soon as we judge someone as
“sexist” or “racist”—even if we don’t say the judgment out loud, but just carry
it in our head—we have almost no power to get what we need. And what did
you say next?
PARTICIPANT N:
 I paused because I was upset and didn’t know what to say. I
didn’t tell him it was a sexist comment. During the pause, I felt the pain of
men telling women things like that, and I wasn’t in the mood to use NVC.
MARSHALL:
 That few-second pause used up all your NVC energy. Then you gave
yourself permission to not use NVC.
PARTICIPANT N:
 I shook my head and said, “Women should have permission to be
bitchy.”
MARSHALL:
 You’re agreeing. An NVCer never agrees or disagrees. I warn you:never go up to others’ heads—it’s ugly up there. [Laughter.] Stay away from
their heads. Let’s go to their hearts.
MARSHALL, AS MAN:
 Is it true that all you women turn into bitches when you get
married?
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 [Silence.]
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 This is the pause. The NVCer is very angry right now.
As I told you earlier, when NVCers get angry, they know that they didn’t hear
what they needed to hear. So this NVCer sits back and enjoys the judgment
show that is going on in her head for a few moments.
 
NVCER [INTERNAL DIALOGUE]:
 I’d like to take his sexist neck and wring it. I’m
sick and tired of these remarks. I’m sick and tired of what I call
insensitivity to my needs. Why, just because I am a woman, do I have to
have this kind of talk thrown at me at work all the time? [Sigh.]
 
NVCER [OUT LOUD]:
 Are you feeling some tension about things going on in your
marriage that you want to talk about? [Lots of laughter.]
PARTICIPANT N:
 Actually, I really thought that at the time, but I didn’t choose to
bring that up, because we were having a farewell lunch for one of the
employees at work.
MARSHALL, AS MAN:
 What are you talking about? We were just having fun. You
take everything so sensitively.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 So you were just playing with me and would have liked
me to be able to enjoy that?
MARSHALL, AS MAN:
 Yeah.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 Well, I’d like to tell you why that is not easy for me to do.
I’d like to tell you how painful it is when I hear comments like that.
MARSHALL, AS MAN:
 Well, you shouldn’t be so sensitive.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 I’d like you to wait until I finish talking before you jump
in and tell me what I shouldn’t do. Would you be willing to do that?
MARSHALL, AS MAN:
 Touchy, touchy! [Laughter.]
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 So you’re really feeling hurt, and you would like me to be
able to play with you?
MARSHALL, AS MAN:
 Yeah—you liberals are really a pain in the ass to be around.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 So you would like to be able to just joke and play and not
have to worry about every word?
MARSHALL, AS MAN:
 Yeah.
MARSHALL, AS NVCER:
 And I’d like to be able to do that too, but I’d like you to
understand why that is so painful for me to do. I’d like you to tell me if youwould be willing to hear what goes on in me.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 So now I educate him.
Name-calling
PARTICIPANT O:
 How does an NVCer react to forceful name-calling?
MARSHALL:
 In NVC, all names are tragic expressions of unmet needs. An NVCer
asks himself, when the names are coming at him, “What are they wanting that
they are not getting?” Tragically, name-callers don’t know any other way of
saying the need except to call the name.
 
NAME-C ALLER:
 You’re too sensitive!
 
NVCER:
 You would like me to understand you differently?
 
NAME-C ALLER:
 You’re the most selfish person I’ve ever met.
 
NVCER:
 You would have liked me to save that last piece of cake for you?
 Names are simply tragic expressions of unmet needs. NVCers know there is
no such thing as normal, abnormal, right, wrong, good, or bad. They know that
all of those are a product of language that has trained people to live under a
king. If you want to train people to be docile to a higher authority, to fit into
hierarchical structures in a subservient way, it is very important to get people
up in their head and to get them thinking what is “right,” what is “normal,”
what is “appropriate,” and to give that power to an authority at the top who
defines what those are. You can get my booklet on social change if you want
to learn more about how this came about.
 When people are raised in that culture, they have this tragic trick played on
them. When they are hurting the most and needing the most, they don’t know
how to express it except by calling other people names.
 With NVC, we want to break that cycle. We know that the basis of violence
is when people are in pain and don’t know how to say that clearly. There is a
book called 
Out of Weakness,
 by Andrew Schmookler. He writes that violence
—whether we are talking about verbal, psychological, or physical violence
between husband and wife, parents and children, or nations—at its base is
people not knowing how to get in touch with what is inside. Instead, they are
taught a language that indicates that there are villains out there, bad guys out
there, who are causing the problem. Then you have a country where even the
leader will say of another country, “They’re the evil empire.” And then the
leaders of the other country will say back, “These are imperialist oppressors,”
instead of seeing and revealing the pain, fear, and unmet needs behind theother’s words. This is a very dangerous social phenomenon. That’s why
NVCers are committed to just hearing the pain and needs behind any name—
not to take it in and not to respond in kind.
EXPRESSING APPRECIATION
PARTICIPANT P:
 Could you please say the three things that you need in order to
express appreciation?
MARSHALL:
 There are three things we need to express appreciation—not praise,
because there is no such thing as praise in NVC. Praise is a classic judging
technique; managers love it because they say research shows that employees
perform better if you praise them at least once a day. Praise does work for a
while, until the employees see the manipulation in it. We never give
appreciation in NVC to try to create some result in other people. We only give
it to celebrate, to let them know how great we feel about something that they
have done. The three things are:
 
• What the other person has done that we
appreciate, and we are very specific about that
 
• Our feelings
 • Our needs that have been fulfilled
WHAT DOES IT TAKE TO PRACTICE NVC?
PARTICIPANT I would also like you to mention the three things that it takes to
become proficient at NVC.
MARSHALL:
 First of all, the good news is that it doesn’t require us to be perfect. It
does not require us to be saints. And we don’t have to be patient. We don’t
have to have positive self-esteem; we don’t have to have selfconfidence. I
have demonstrated that you don’t even have to be a normal person.
[Laughter.]
 What does it take? First and foremost, it takes spiritual clarity. We have to
be highly conscious of how we want to connect with human beings. We’re
living in a society, I’m afraid to say, that is largely judgmental in its history
and evolution. It’s leaning toward NVC—and very rapidly if you think like
Teilhard de Chardin. (He was a paleontologist who thought in terms of tens of
thousands of years.) But it’s not moving as fast as 
I’d
 like, so I’m doing what I
can to speed it up.
 The main thing I’m trying to do is work on myself. When I get myself fully
engaged with NVC, I think I am helping the planet; then what energy I have
left over, I use to try to help other people become engaged with NVC. So themost important thing is spiritual clarity—that we be highly conscious of how
we want to connect with people. For me, I have to stop every day—two, three,
four times—really stop and remind myself how I want to connect with other
people in this world.
 How do I do that? This is individual for everyone. Some people call it
meditation, prayer, stopping and slowing down—whatever you call it. I do it
differently every day myself, but it’s basically just stopping and slowing down
and doing a check on what is running through my head. Are judgments
running through my head? Is NVC running through my head? I stop and look
at what is going on in my head, and I slow down. I remind myself of the
“subtle sneaky important reason I was born a human being and not a chair,” to
use a line from one of my favorite plays, 
A Thousand Clowns.
 So that’s the
most important thing: spiritual clarity.
 Second: practice, practice, practice. I make a note every time I catch myself
judging myself or other people. I make a note of what the stimulus was for
this. What did I do? What did others say or do that, all of a sudden, I gave
myself permission to turn back into judgment? Then I use that. Some time in
the day, I sit and look at my list, and I try to give myself empathy for the pain
that was going on in me at the time. I try not to beat myself up. I try to hear
what pain was going on in me that led me to speak in that way. Then I ask
myself, “How could I have used NVC in that situation? What might the other
person have been feeling and needing?”
 Now, NVCers love to mess things up, because an NVCer doesn’t try to be
perfect. We know the danger of trying to be perfect. We just try to become
progressively less stupid. [Laughter.] When your objective is to become
progressively less stupid, every time you mess something up, it becomes cause
for a celebration. It gives you a chance to learn how to be less stupid. So
practice, practice, practice learning how to be less stupid.
 And third, it really helps to be part of an NVC support community. We are
living in a judgmental world, and it helps to create an NVC world around us
from which we can start to build a greater world—an NVC world. That is why
I am so grateful that we have all of the NVC teams locally.
WHAT’S LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT?
It may help you to understand that Nonviolent Communication grew from my
attempt to understand the concept of love and how to manifest it, how to 
do
 it. I
had come to the conclusion that love is not just something we feel, but
something we manifest, something we do, something we have. And 
love issomething we give.
 We give of ourselves in particular ways. It’s a gift when you
reveal yourself nakedly and honestly, at any given moment, for no other purpose
than to reveal what’s alive in you. Not to blame, criticize, or punish—just “Here
I am, and here is what I would like. This is my vulnerability at this moment.” To
me, that giving is a manifestation of love.
Another way we give of ourselves is through how we receive another person’s
message. It’s a gift to receive it empathically, connecting with what’s alive in
that person, making no judgment. It’s a gift when we try to hear what is alive in
the other person and what that person would like. So Nonviolent Communication
is just a manifestation of what I understand love to be. In that way, it’s similar to
the Judeo-Christian concepts of “Love your neighbor as yourself” and “Judge
not lest you be judged.”
It’s amazing what happens when we connect with people in this way. This
beauty, this power connects us with an energy that I choose to call Beloved
Divine Energy—one of the many names for God. So Nonviolent Communication
helps me stay connected with that beautiful Divine Energy within myself and to
connect with it in others. It’s the closest thing to “love” I’ve ever experienced.
CONCLUSION
In relationships, we want to be ourselves, but we want to do that in a way that is
respectful to others, even if they’re not treating us in a particularly respectful
way. We want to connect with them, yet we don’t want to get caught up in their
way of doing business. So how do we do both? I’m suggesting that we do that by
expressing ourselves very assertively. NVC is a very assertive language. We can
be very loud and clear about what we feel, what our needs are, what we want
from the other person. However, we’re very assertive without doing two things
that turn assertiveness into violence. In NVC, we assert ourselves but without
criticizing the other. We say nothing in the language of NVC that in any way
implies that the other person is ever wrong. By wrong, I mean about a thousand
different things—inappropriate, selfish, insensitive—in fact, any word that
classifies or categorizes what the other person is.
So, in NVC we learn how to be very assertive about saying what’s going on in
us, and we also have the wonderful art when we speak NVC of very assertively
telling people what we would like them to do. But we present this to them as a
request and not as a demand. Because at the moment people hear from our lips
anything that sounds like a criticism or a demand, or if it sounds somehow to
them like we don’t value their needs equal to our needs—when others get the
impression that we are only out to get our way—we lose, because then they haveless energy to sincerely consider our needs. Most of their energy will go into
defensiveness or resistance.
We want to be very assertive when we speak NVC—to speak it in a way that
gives others our assertiveness as a gift that reveals nakedly what’s going on in
us, that clearly tells them what we would like from them.
I would say the basic human need, the thing that is the greatest feeling for
everybody universally, is the joy we feel when we see we have the power to
enrich life. I have never met a person who doesn’t enjoy giving to other people,
provided it’s done willingly. I believe this happens once others trust that I am not
trying to coerce them into doing anything and we can keep an NVC dance going
in which we both continue to share what we both feel and need. And I have
every hope that this is happening. In my relationships, I get to test out this rosy
philosophy quite a bit.
3
 
G
ETTING
 P
AST THE
 P
AIN
 B
ETWEEN
 U
S
Healing and Reconciliation without Compromise
 
T
he following is excerpted from a workshop I gave on October 4, 2002.
“Getting Past the Pain” focuses on mending our relationships with one another
and gives us skills for understanding and resolving our conflicts, for healing old
hurts, and for developing satisfying relationships using NVC.
In this chapter, you will find steps you can take for healing or reconciling any
conflicted relationship—whether at work, at home, at school, or in your
community. It will also give you a sense of the energy of empathy: the
compassion and the heartfelt “presence” necessary for healing to take place.
Nonviolent Communication skills empower you to make lasting peace and even
to prevent trouble from happening in the first place. Join this dialogue and enjoy
the magic that understanding brings when we listen and speak from the heart.
The training opens with me role-playing a situation posed by an audience
member.
HEALING BITTERNESS
MARSHALL:
 What can I share with you about healing and reconciliation that
would meet your needs? What would you like to hear me talk about? Or
maybe you have some pain left over from something that happened to you in
the past with somebody, and you would like us to do it “live” and not just talk
about it?
PARTICIPANT R:
 I wonder how I can get past or release a lot of bitterness I have
toward somebody.
MARSHALL:
 How about if I use Nonviolent Communication and play the role of
the person you have the bitterness toward? I’ll be that person, but I’m going tobe speaking to you as someone living Nonviolent Communication. All you
need to do is just say what you want to say. Okay, you got the game? Good,
now who am I going to be?
PARTICIPANT R:
 My brother.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 Sister, I am very touched that you want to heal this
bitterness between us and by the courage you’re showing. What would be a
big gift to me is if you would share what is alive with you right now in
relationship to me. Just say what’s going on, however you want to.
PARTICIPANT R:
 I have a real ethical problem with you. You weren’t honest with
me or reliable when our parents were declining. When I reached out to you to
try and work it out, you were unwilling. You just wanted to put the past
behind us. That’s what you’ve always done, our whole life. You say it’s my
problem; you don’t want to deal with it. Whatever is upsetting to me doesn’t
seem to matter.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 You’ve said a lot to me here, a lot of different feelings.
Let me check to be sure I understand fully. I’m hearing a lot of anger
connecting to a need you may have had for more support when our parents
were declining. Did I hear that much right?
PARTICIPANT R:
 Yes.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 So that was real, and you’d like some understanding
now about how difficult this was for you to go through, how you would’ve
really loved support. But not only didn’t you get the support that you
would’ve liked, I’m also hearing that some of the things I did since then in
relationship to family matters have left you with a great deal of pain—that you
would have really liked us to have made those decisions differently
PARTICIPANT R:
 Yeah.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 Yeah, especially since it wasn’t the only time you’ve
experienced that your own needs weren’t given the consideration you
would’ve liked. Did I hear your message accurately?
PARTICIPANT R:
 Yeah, yeah.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 Do you like me when I’m wearing empathy ears?
PARTICIPANT R:
 Yes! Will you be my brother?
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 So, still wearing these ears, I’d like to hear whatever
else is still alive, still going on in you.
PARTICIPANT R:
 You say you want us to get back together, but I just can’t. We just
don’t resolve conflicts in the family, and I don’t want to live like that any
more.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 So, if I hear your need, it’s to protect yourself from the
pain that you’ve felt in the past when you’ve reached out and tried to resolvethings and it didn’t happen. At this point you’ve had enough of that. It’s as if
part of you would like to hear from me, but not if it means going through the
pain that you’ve felt in the past.
PARTICIPANT R:
 Right. I’m still left in a quandary, because I can’t see it working
either way. If I go back, it’s not going to be good for me, but then just staying
away seems unnatural.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 So you’re really torn. You have two needs. One need is
for there to be reconciliation and healing between us. The other is this strong
need to protect yourself. You don’t know how to meet both needs.
PARTICIPANT R:
 Right.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 That’s a really painful conflict.
PARTICIPANT R:
 Right.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 Anything else, Sister, that you’d like me to hear before
I react to what you’ve said?
PARTICIPANT R:
 No.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 Hearing you now, with these empathy ears on, I feel a
deep, deep sadness, because I can see that I have not met my own needs with
some of the things that I’ve done in our relationship: my need to nurture you
in the way that I’d like, to contribute to your well-being. When I see how my
actions have just the opposite effect, how they’ve created so much pain for
you, I feel a deep sadness, and I’m very vulnerable right now. I’d like to hear
how you feel when I tell you about this sadness.
PARTICIPANT R:
 You’re probably in the same quandary that I am, in the sense that
you don’t know how to meet my needs without being highly uncomfortable
yourself.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 I want to thank you for anticipating that. What I’d
really like right now is for you to just hear how sad I feel that I didn’t get my
need met to contribute to your well-being as I would’ve liked.
PARTICIPANT R:
 I appreciate that.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 Now, what I would like to do is tell you what was going
on in me when I did those things in our relationship. And—I think you’ve
already somewhat anticipated this—I’d like to make it as clear as I can. First,
about not providing more support for your efforts in dealing with the stress
around our parents when they were declining: I had an inner message telling
me that I really should help and that I was a rat for not giving more support.
And then because I was feeling so guilty, I wasn’t able to hear your pain and
your needs with my compassionate listening ears. Your requests were
sounding too much like a demand on me. I was torn because I wanted to help,
but I was also angry hearing a demand. I felt guilty, and I just didn’t knowhow to handle all of those feelings going on in me except to try to avoid the
whole issue. I’d like to know how you feel when I tell you that.
PARTICIPANT R:
 It makes sense … clarifies things.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 So then, just as you have some hurt in relationship to
me, I have some hurt that I haven’t known how to express to you about things
that have happened in the past. I wish I could’ve known how to talk about it,
but having that hurt inside and not knowing how to express it made it come
out angry toward you at times. I wish I could have expressed it differently. So
how do you feel when I tell you that?
PARTICIPANT R:
 Good to hear.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 Is there anything else that you’d like me to hear, or that
you want to say, or that you want to hear from me?
PARTICIPANT R:
 I guess I’d want to know how to work through this in a way that
is comfortable enough for each of us. Then we can move forward. It’s a mess
that has to be cleaned up. And I’m willing to hear whatever you have to say, to
open the dialogue.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 I have an idea. Tell me how this feels to you: how about
asking the folks who are recording this workshop to send me a copy of this as
a start? And then maybe call me and ask me if I’d like to continue this kind of
dialogue, maybe with the help of a third party?
PARTICIPANT R:
 Yeah, I think that’s an excellent idea.
MARSHALL, AS BROTHER:
 Okay, let’s do it.
PARTICIPANT R:
 Thank you.
Reactions to the Role-Play
MARSHALL:
 Okay, any reactions to that situation? Questions?
PARTICIPANT S:
 What would you recommend in the event that sending the tape
was not a possibility?
MARSHALL:
 I think we got some of the healing accomplished that Participant R
wanted, that we dealt with the hurt. Now she wants to deepen the relationship.
That shows that she doesn’t have to have her brother physically available to
get some healing. Sure, it would be nice now to deepen things with him and
go further, but she doesn’t need to depend on his availability for her own
healing to take place. We don’t need the other person for healing to take place
—especially if that person is not alive any more or is inaccessible.
Fortunately, we can heal 
fully 
without the other person being involved.
PARTICIPANT S:
 It seems to me to be very important, if I have an issue with a
person that I cannot heal by myself, to have somebody who is able to play the
NVC part with me—like you did right now—someone who is able to listen tomy issues and listen empathically. So my question is, if I don’t have that
friend, do you have a method to do that with myself?
MARSHALL:
 Yes, I think you can do it with yourself. Certainly, in the best of all
worlds in the previous example, we would have had the brother here. That
would have been even more powerful. He could have played himself. But we
can do it without him.
 Let me clarify one of the important principles we use to do that: it’s very
important to notice in the role-play how little we talked about the past. Sister
made very brief reference to what I, the brother, did, but we didn’t go into
detail. What I’ve found over the years is the more we talk about the past, the
less we heal from it. Most of the role-play conversation was about what was
alive in both of us right now. We talked about the present—what she’s still
feeling as a result of what happened in the past.
 Most people think you have to understand the past to get healing and that
you have to tell the story to get the understanding. They mix up intellectual
understanding with empathy. Empathy is where the healing comes from.
Telling the story does give intellectual understanding about why the person did
it, but that’s not empathy, and it doesn’t do any healing. In fact, retelling the
story can deepen the pain. It’s like reliving the pain again.
 So though we did not deny the past, and we did make reference to what the
brother had done, we didn’t go into the details. We didn’t say, for example, “I
had to take Mother to all the stores, and not only that, but when Dad got sick,
you know, blah, blah, blah.” The more she would’ve talked about that, the less
healing would’ve happened. Especially when you do it with the people you
have pain about. They’re not going to see that your objective is to get
understanding for the pain. They’re going to think your objective is to create a
case to send them to hell.
PARTICIPANT S:
 I was kind of getting the feeling that the brother had issues that
he hadn’t expressed to her. What if he’s holding stuff against her?
MARSHALL:
 As the brother, at the end I said, “I’m feeling some hurt that I don’t
know how to express to you.” That’s all I need to do. I said that I was still
feeling some hurt in relationship to the past for which I needed some
understanding. But that understanding didn’t mean that I had to tell the story,
to talk more about the past. It just meant I got it back from her. I saw in her
eyes that she had heard it.
THE FIRST STAGE OF HEALING: EMPATHIC
CONNECTIONMARSHALL:
 So, what we first want to remember, whether we want to heal
ourselves or we want to help somebody else heal, is to put the 
focus on what’s
alive now, 
not on what happened in the past. If there is a discussion of the
past, say five words, no more: “when you ran away from home,” “when you
hit me,” whatever. The first stage of healing involves empathizing with what’s
alive right now in relationship to what happened. In my role as brother, I
empathically connected 
to what is alive in her now. Doing that requires certain
things.
 The first step to empathic connection is what Martin Buber called the most
precious gift one human being can give to another: presence. In the role of the
brother, I was fully present to what was alive in her now, in this moment. I
wasn’t thinking of what I was going to say next or what had happened in the
past.
 This is a hard gift to give to somebody, because it means that I can bring
nothing in from the past. Even a diagnosis I’ve had of this person in the past
will get in the way of empathy. This is why my clinical training in
psychoanalysis was a deficit. It taught me how to sit and think about what the
person was saying and how to intellectually interpret it, but not how to be fully
present to this person, which is really where healing comes from. To be fully
present, I have to throw out all of my clinical training, all of my diagnoses, all
of this prior knowledge about human beings and their development. All of that
only gives me intellectual understanding, which blocks empathy.
 The best I can tell you about what empathy feels like to me is that it’s like
riding a surfboard. You’re trying to get with the energy of the wave, trying to
hear what’s alive right now. I’m trying to go with the rhythm of life that’s in
this person. And sometimes just by looking at the floor I can get more with it
than looking at the person and being distracted by things.
PARTICIPANT S:
 I get sucked into sympathy, though.
Empathy Versus Sympathy
MARSHALL:
 Sympathy, empathy—let’s get clear about the difference. If I have
strong feelings in me, just being conscious of them is sympathy, not empathy.
So, if I had been the brother and I had said, “Boy, I feel sad when you say
that,” that would have been sympathy, not empathy. Remember a time when
you had a pain in your body, maybe a headache or a toothache, and you got
into a good book? What happened to the pain? You weren’t aware of it. The
pain was there—I mean, the physical condition hadn’t changed—but you
weren’t home. You were out visiting. That’s empathy. You were visiting the
book. With empathy, we’re with the other person’s feelings. That doesn’t mean we
feel their feelings. We’re just with them while they are feeling those feelings.
Now, if I take my mind away from them for one second, I may notice I have
strong feelings of my own. If so, I don’t try to push my feelings down. My
feelings are telling me I’m not with the other person, that I’m home again. So I
say to myself, “Go back to them.”
 However, if my pain is too great, I can’t empathize. So I might say, “I’m in
so much pain right now hearing some things you’ve said, I’m not able to
listen. Could we give me a few moments to deal with that so that I can go back
to hearing you?”
 It’s important not to mix up empathy and sympathy, because when someone
is in pain and then I say, “Oh, I understand how you feel, and I feel so sad
about that,” I take the flow away from them and bring their attention over to
me.
 I sometimes use a phrase that many people hate about Nonviolent
Communication—I say that empathy requires “learning how to enjoy another
person’s pain.” Now, why do I use such a sick phrase? When I used to come to
San Diego, a friend of mine would call me on the phone and say, “Come over
and play with my pain.” She knew that I knew what she meant by that. She
was dying of a very painful disease, and she used to tell me that what made it
even worse was having to deal with other people’s reactions to her pain. Their
response coming out of their good, sympathetic hearts was creating so much
of a problem for her that she would rather be alone with her pain than have to
end up taking care of other people around it. And so she said, “That’s why I
like to call you, Marshall, because you’re so coldhearted. You’re such a
miserable son of a bitch. I know I can talk with you, and you’re not going to
give a damn about anybody but yourself.”
 She knew I could understand “idiomatic NVC.” And she knew that I
considered it a pleasure in the sense that whether others are experiencing pain
or joy, when we are present to them in a certain way, it’s precious. Of course, I
would rather they experience joy, but it’s precious just to be there with them
and with whatever is alive in them. That’s what my friend meant by “play with
my pain.”
Staying Present in the Face of Strong Feelings
PARTICIPANT S:
 How do you stay really present and not get swept up in all these
feelings?
MARSHALL:
 I don’t know how to do that all the time. I was trying to do some
healing work with a woman from Algeria who wanted some healing from me.Extremists had dragged her outside and made her watch while they tied her
best friend behind a car and dragged this friend to her death. Then they took
the woman inside and raped her in front of her parents. They were going to
come back the next night and kill her, but she got to a phone and called friends
of mine in Geneva who got her out in the middle of the night.
 I got a phone call from them where I live in Switzerland. And they said,
“Marshall, can you do the healing work with this woman?” They told me what
had happened.
 I said, “I’m doing a training during the day, but send her over this evening.”
 They said, “Marshall, here’s the problem. We told her how you’ll do the
healing work, that you will play the role of the other person. She’s afraid she’ll
kill you.”
 I said, “You explained this is role-play—it’s not the actual person?”
 They said, “She understands that. But she says, ‘Even if I imagine he’s that
person, I’ll kill him. I know I will.’ And, Marshall, you should know that she’s
a large woman.”
 I thanked them for the warning, and then I said, “I’ll tell you what. I’m
going to have to have an interpreter in the room. It might make her feel safer
to know that there’s going to be another person there. I’ve got a guy in my
training from Rwanda, and after what he’s been through, I don’t think this will
scare him. Ask her if she will feel safe if this guy from Rwanda is in there to
help me out if needed.”
 So those were the conditions under which she was there.
 To address your question, when I started to hear this woman’s pain, the
enormity of her suffering, twice I just said, “Time out, time out. I need time.” I
had to go out into the hall and do a lot of work on myself to be able to go
back. I couldn’t just “go back” to her. The only thing I wanted to do at that
point was to find those guys and do a little “Detroit therapy” with them. I had
to work on myself for twenty minutes or so before I could go back to her.
 What I’m saying, then, is that sometimes my pain is so great, I’m not able
to be as fully present as I’d like. And I haven’t found that to be a big problem.
The other person can understand it usually.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Don’t you think it’s helpful sometimes to share that pain with the
other person?
MARSHALL:
 Very often I do. I say to the other person, “I’m in such pain, I can’t
hear you right now. Do you want to hear what that pain is, or are you in too
much pain yourself ?” I’d say that half the time, the other person wants to hear
it, and is able to. So that’s another option. In this case though, she was crying
so hard and screaming, and I wasn’t at all optimistic that she needed to dealwith my feelings.
Empathy Steps
MARSHALL:
 Back to our empathy steps. 
First, 
empathy requires presence— a
focus on what is alive in the other person at this moment, on that person’s
feelings and needs. 
Second, 
it requires checking things out with the other
person, making sure you’re connecting with that person’s feelings and needs.
Both steps we’ve mentioned so far can be done silently—by being fully
present and having your attention on the other person’s feelings and needs.
 We can also check our understanding verbally, reflecting aloud what we
sense the feelings and needs are. Let’s remember to have our intention be to
create empathy, as opposed to practicing a mechanical technique. The number
one reason for checking aloud is to be sure we’re connecting to others. We
don’t want them to see us as using something on them. So when we check it
out, we do it in a way that lets others know we’re not sure we’re connecting
fully and we’d like to verify what’s real for them about what they’ve said.
 The other condition under which we might check it out—even if we’re
pretty confident we’ve heard them—occurs when we sense that they really
made themselves vulnerable in saying what they did. We can guess that, if we
were in that position, we would really appreciate some confirmation that we
were understood. These are the only two conditions under which we
communicate empathy out loud instead of silently.
 I was recently in Denmark working with a woman with an enormous
amount of pain. At least twenty minutes had passed. She expressed her pain
very beautifully, but she did it pretty nakedly. It was very easy for me to hear
what was alive in her. I didn’t feel any need to reflect it out loud; so for twenty
minutes, I sat there silently. At the end of those twenty minutes, she just
jumped up and hugged me and said, “Thank you for all of that empathy,
Marshall.” I had not said one word. I was with her the whole time. She felt it
without a word being spoken.
PARTICIPANT R:
 So, with empathy, you’re empty of yourself and full of the other
person.
MARSHALL:
 With empathy, I’m fully 
with 
them, not full 
of 
them—that’s
sympathy.
 The 
third 
step for empathizing is to stay with them until they give you signs
that they’re finished. Be aware that very often the first one or two messages
that people give us are but the tip of the iceberg; we haven’t gotten down to
the bottom. There are a couple of signs to help us determine whether people
are finished with empathy. One sign is the relief you can feel in them: empathyfeels damn good. So if they got the empathy they need, you can feel that sense
of relief, and you’ll feel it in your own body. Anyone in the room with you
will feel it. Another sign is they will often stop talking.
 The 
fourth 
step doesn’t happen until the relief is felt. During the empathy
process, if every time I understand something and they come back with, “Yes,
and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,” that’s a signal that they need more
empathy. But when I feel this relief in tension, when I see that they have
stopped talking, chances are they’ve received the empathy they needed. But I
always like to triple-check by saying to them, “Is there more that you’d like to
say?” I’ve learned to be very slow in shifting my attention away from them to
myself, so it doesn’t hurt to check again.
 It would help if people we are doing the empathy work with knew how to
say, “Finished,” but most people don’t. And most of the time, even after the
empathy, they want something else. Our 
fifth 
step, then, is to empathize with
their “postempathic” request, or that something extra they want. This request
might be for information about how we feel having heard what they’ve said,
especially if they’ve been very vulnerable.
 It’s a very human thing to want to know how what you’ve given has
affected another person. Still, most people don’t know how to ask for that. So
if, after the empathy, I see them looking at me, I usually say, “Would you like
to hear how I feel about what you said?” Sometimes they do, and sometimes
they don’t want to hear how I feel.
 In addition to wanting information about how the person giving empathy
feels, sometimes the postempathic request is for some kind of advice about
better meeting their needs. When it comes to advising your child, however,
never give advice unless you receive a request in writing first signed by a
lawyer. Triple-check that your child wants advice, because it’s almost always
my first reaction to skip the empathy and go directly to the advice.
THE FOUR STAGES OF HEALING
The First Stage of Healing: Empathy
We started with me playing the role of the other person—the brother— giving
the sister empathy for her pain. Being with her, I sensed that she would like to
get some verification, and I checked out loud most of the time. I tried to be fully
present to her feelings and needs. But notice that I did all of this in the role of the
brother. Why didn’t I do it just as myself? As Marshall? I think that anyone
giving her empathy would have helped to heal her. However, over the years, I’ve
found that it’s more powerful the closer the empathy comes to the real thing. Inthis example, if the brother were around, I would’ve wanted to help him give
that empathy directly to his sister. But since she didn’t have him here, I played
the role of the brother.
To sum up, then, the first stage in the healing process is to give someone the
empathy they need. There are three ways to do it: you can give it as a third party,
you can play the role of the other person involved, or you can get that other
person there to give it in person.
The Second Stage of Healing: Mourning in NVC
The second overall step in the healing process is mourning. In the role of the
brother, after I empathized, I mourned. Here’s what that sounded like: “Sister,
when I see how my actions have contributed to your pain, I feel very sad. It
didn’t meet my need to nurture and support you in a way I really would’ve
liked.”
The main thing here is that it requires us to see a big difference between
mourning and apology. I see apology as a very violent act. It is violent to the
person receiving it and violent to the person giving it. What’s even more tragic is
that people receiving an apology usually like it—they are addicted by the culture
to want the person apologizing to suffer and to see that person full of self-hate.
What I find to be true is that people will never apologize or want an apology if
they have experienced sincere mourning instead. Let’s look at the difference
between mourning and apology more closely.
Apology is based on moralistic judgment, that what I did was wrong and I
should suffer for it—I should even hate myself for what I did. That’s radically
different from mourning, which is not based on moralistic judgments. Mourning
is based on life-serving judgments. Did I meet my own needs? No. Then what
need didn’t I meet?
When we are in touch with our unmet need, we never feel shame, guilt, self-
anger, or the depression that we feel when we think that what we did was wrong.
We feel sadness, deep sadness, sometimes frustration, but never depression,
guilt, anger, or shame. Those four feelings tell us we are making moralistic
judgments at the moment we are feeling those feelings. Anger, depression, guilt,
and shame are the product of the thinking that is at the base of violence on our
planet. And I’m glad to have those feelings, because if I’m thinking in a way that
I believe supports violence on our planet, I want as quickly as possible to
transform that thinking.
In our second step, then, I mourned; I didn’t apologize, I mourned.
Getting UnstuckPARTICIPANT R:
 In your work, do you come across people who go into mourning
and don’t find a way to complete it?
MARSHALL:
 No, usually what keeps us stuck is moralistic thinking and
judgments. I like the way Ernest Becker, the anthropologist, put it in his book
The Revolution in Psychiatry. 
He agreed with Thomas Szasz, a psychiatrist,
that “mental illness” is a tragic metaphor. Instead, he showed a different way
of looking at the phenomenon.
 Becker’s definition of depression relates to your idea about getting stuck
and never coming out of it: “Depression results from cognitively arrested
alternatives.” This means that our thinking blocks us from being aware of our
needs and then being able to take action to meet our needs.
 Let’s take an example of someone mourning who is having trouble
completing it. The person mourning thinks over and over, “I’m a poor parent.
If I had treated my child differently, he wouldn’t have run away from home
and been killed on the train, running away from me. I should’ve known better.
What’s wrong with me? I’m a terrible parent.” You get the idea. That kind of
thinking can go on for years and years, and the person never gets out of it. But
that’s not mourning. That’s getting stuck in moralistic thinking, all the “should
haves.” It doesn’t go anywhere. “I’m a terrible person” is static thinking.
That’s what gets us stuck.
PARTICIPANT R:
 Could you repeat that quotation and explain a little more about
it?
MARSHALL:
 “Depression results from cognitively arrested alternatives.”
Translated into my language, it’s that our thinking keeps us from being aware
of our needs, and taking steps to meet our needs. We get stuck in our thoughts.
 I’ll give another example. I work with very depressed people labeled as
“bipolar” this and “depressive reaction” that. They sit there so depressed,
thinking, “Oh, I don’t want to live.” If I use the empathic language of
Nonviolent Communication and ask, “Could you tell me what needs of yours
are not getting met?” I would get from them, “I’m a terrible failure.” I’m
asking their needs, but they’re telling me what they, as people, are: “I’m a
terrible friend.”
 We also get stuck if we compare ourselves to someone else: “My sister’s
two years younger than me, and she’s an administrator in her business. Look at
me. I’m only an assistant supervisor.” I’m stuck by comparing. If you’re
comparing yourself to others, you must have read Dan Greenburg’s book 
How
to Make Yourself Miserable. 
One chapter teaches that if you don’t know how
to be depressed, just compare yourself to other people. And if you don’t know
how to do that, he’s got some exercises. One shows a picture of a man and awoman who would be described as handsome and beautiful by contemporary
standards. All of their measurements are on the picture. Greenburg’s exercise
is this: take your measurements, compare them to the measurements of these
beautiful people, and think about the difference. Even if you start off happy, I
guarantee that if you do that exercise, you will end up depressed. Greenburg
doesn’t stop there. Just when you think you are as depressed as you can get,
you turn the page, and he says:
Now, this is just a warm-up, because we all know that beauty is skin deep
and that’s not important. Let’s now compare ourselves to people on
dimensions that are important. Like what have you achieved in your stage
of life with some other people that I have pulled at random from the phone
book. I’ve interviewed these people and asked them what they’ve achieved,
and now you can compare yourself.
 The first person he gets out of the phone book is Mozart. I don’t know a lot
about history, but I don’t think Mozart had a phone, so I don’t entirely trust
Greenburg here. But anyway, he says this man, Mozart, has written several
pieces of music that have lasted over the centuries as masterpieces, 
et cetera
,
et cetera
.
PARTICIPANT R:
 Started when he was five.
MARSHALL:
 Started when he was five. Now compare what you’ve achieved at
your stage in life with what Mozart had achieved by age five. You can see that
comparing yourself to others doesn’t get you anywhere. That can go on
forever; you never get out of it. That kind of thinking is taught in schools and
supported by the manufacturers of antidepressants. The more you think that
way, the more business for them is going to be good.
The Third Stage of Healing: Acknowledgment of Past Needs
Let’s briefly review the stages we’ve undertaken. First, Sister got empathy from
me in the role of Brother. Second, I, the brother, mourned—not apologized,
mourned—and that required a consciousness of my needs that weren’t met. I
also expressed the feelings that came with those needs not getting met. In the
third stage of the healing process, Brother acknowledges to Sister what was
going on in him when he did what he did. So playing the role of the brother, I
said to her, “I’d really like to tell you what was going on in me at the time that I
was doing that. I had these messages inside my head telling me I should help
you, hearing them coming from outside of me. Understand, Sister, that I’m not
saying you yourself said those messages, but I was hearing them inside me and
as a demand. So I was torn inside: I wanted to help you, and at the same time,my need for autonomy was threatened by my hearing ‘shoulds’ inside and
outside.”
The Fourth Stage of Healing: Reverse Empathy
In the fourth stage, we turn the empathy around. In this final stage of the healing
process—getting empathy for the person who did the act that stimulated the
other person’s pain—it’s very important that it be done when the person in pain
is ready to empathize. Almost always, people who have been in a lot of pain tell
me that they’ve had somebody say, “You should empathize with the other
person. If you empathize, you’ll feel better about it.” I think it’s true that the
healing is deep when we can empathize with what’s going on in the person who
raped us, who did something harmful to us. But to ask people to do that before
they have had the empathy they need is just to commit further violence to them.
As a further example, let’s go back to the woman I mentioned from Algeria
and to the part of the process where I was going to role-play the other person,
expressing what was going on in me (him) when I (he) violated her so terribly.
Twice she screamed at me, “How could you have done it?” She was asking me,
“How?” because there is a hunger in people to understand. But each time she
said it, I could see she was still in too much pain to listen and then to give me
empathy.
As I said, I take a lot of time getting to these last two stages of the healing
process. I want to make sure others have had the empathy they need. So I say, “I
will tell you how, but first I want to be sure that you have all the understanding
you need.” When that is finished, the woman—or any person—is usually hungry
to empathize with me—that is, with the person who hurt them.
PROCESS VERSUS MECHANICS
PARTICIPANT S:
 I was experimenting with NVC once with somebody else who
was also practicing. What really upsets me is that when I am trying to do it,
the other person also practicing empathy says, “Okay, you didn’t express your
feelings,” or, “You didn’t …” Maybe practicing has to be a little mechanical in
the beginning, but can’t the technique be more of a natural process? If I skip a
step, I want to have freedom to do that. For example, you said that after
empathy, you mourn. If I’m so structure-oriented that I think I need to do
everything exactly literally, then if I don’t feel like mourning, I will be fake
with myself, which is exactly the opposite of what I think it is you’re
suggesting to be in contact with. I really have a need to remind myself that the
technique is a great help, but that it won’t work for me by itself without beingtrue to what I’m feeling in that moment.
MARSHALL:
 I like very much what you’re saying. It was said in a slightly
different way by a woman in Zurich, Switzerland. She had come to a
workshop and saw a husband and wife working with me; she saw what
happened when they empathically connected with each other in a conflict that
they’d had for a long time. She saw how beautiful it was to just see the energy
in their faces when, for once, they weren’t having enemy images and were
really hearing each other. And it had been a very painful conflict, maybe
fifteen years of going over it. The Swiss woman came back a year later and
said, “You know, Marshall, in the year since I was in your workshop, every
time I’m in a difficult situation, I bring to my consciousness the look on the
woman’s and man’s faces when they connected empathically.” And then she
said, “Then, even when I speak in a hurtful or harming way, it’s still NVC.”
You see, she had it the way you do now. The mechanics are only helpful to the
degree to which they support our connecting in a certain way. If we get so
preoccupied with the mechanics that they become the only objective, we’ve
lost the process.
 Now, this is one of the hardest things about our training, because one of the
things that people say they like about our training is that it really helps them
manifest in concrete ways what they’ve always believed. So they like the fact
that it is a way of concretely manifesting. However, its very concreteness can
be a disadvantage when it becomes an objective to do it right.
SLOWING DOWN AND TAKING TIME
PARTICIPANT R:
 I’m working and struggling in my life with this whole issue of
slowing my body down, slowing my relationships down, so I can be more
present to myself and to other people and to life. I see you doing this constant
traveling. I would find it inspiring and helpful to hear if it’s true that you
weren’t always this slow and to learn a little bit about the evolution of how
you slowed yourself down.
MARSHALL:
 I think it’s related to what Participant S was saying. In the middle of
the rat race, it’s very important for me to know how to choose to make use of
the three words I probably have said to myself more than any three words in
the past forty years: 
take your time. 
Those three words give you the power to
come from a spirituality of your own choosing, not the one you were
programmed for.
 In my meditation materials, I have a very powerful picture that helps me
remember to take my time. A friend of mine from Israel is very active inorganizing Israelis and Palestinians who’ve lost children in the struggle and
who want to create something else out of the misery. So one of the steps was
to write a book in honor of his son who had been killed; he used the energy
that he suffered from to go in a different direction. He gave me a copy of the
book. And even though it was written in Hebrew and I couldn’t read it, I am
glad he did, because I opened it up, and there on the first page is the last
picture taken of his son before he was killed in the battle of Lebanon. On the
son’s T-shirt it says, “Take Your Time.” I asked my friend, the author/father, if
he had a bigger-sized picture that I could have to help me remember. I told
him why those three words were so important to me. He said, “Then let me tell
you also, Marshall, this will probably make it even more powerful. When I
went to my son’s commanding officer to ask, ‘Why did you send him?
Couldn’t you see that anybody you asked to do that was going to get killed?’
he said, ‘We didn’t take our time.’ That’s why I put that picture in there of my
son.”
 It’s critical for me to be able to slow down, take my time, to come from an
energy I choose, the one I believe that we were meant to come from, not the
one I was programmed into.
 My Israeli friend also said, “Marshall, I’ll give you a poem written by an
Israeli poet who was influenced the same way you were when he saw the
picture.” And the first line in his poem is, “Take your time, it’s yours you
know.” And I have to keep working at that because, as my beloved partner
keeps pointing out, I forget it, and I start to race.
EMPATHY FOR THOSE WHO WOULD HURT YOU
PARTICIPANT R:
 I’ve heard you say that children are less likely to be beaten by
someone if they empathize with the person ready to beat them. I assume this
applies to adults as well. Do you have any suggestions or emergency phrases
that they might pull out at that time?
MARSHALL:
 Yes. The first thing we teach them is never to put your “but” in your
dad’s face when he’s angry. So, when Daddy says, “Why did you do this?”
don’t reply, “But Dad … .” Never give an explanation.
 What to do instead is, as fast as you can, put your attention on what your
dad is feeling and needing. Be conscious that he’s not angry at you; you didn’t
make him angry. But hear his anger and hear what need isn’t getting met.
 We practice, practice, practice this. It’s one thing to talk about it
theoretically, but it’s another thing, when someone’s about to beat you, to
know how to empathically connect with what’s alive in that person. We teachpolice how to do this in dangerous conditions. A lot of research has
documented that police are far more likely to come out alive when dealing
with violent people if the police officers are armed with empathy rather than
with a gun.
 But to ask kids to do it is a bigger challenge. So we have to give children a
great deal of practice. If you’re around parents who think that they always
know what’s right and that if people are wrong they should be punished for it,
then it’s likely that you will beat your own child as well. Until we can get hold
of the parents the child lives with, we teach the children the best self-defense
we know: empathic connection.
DEALING WITH YOUR OWN ANGRY BEHAVIOR
PARTICIPANT S:
 How do you deal with your own personal violent behavior when
you’ve communicated with another person and gone through everything, and
you get to the point where you feel like blowing up? When the traffic’s bad,
when you’re going to the airport, or whatever.
MARSHALL:
 If you follow me around when I leave here this evening, you will
probably see twenty such situations between now and when I get to Santa
Barbara tonight. My partner’s sleeping now—otherwise, she would verify
that.
PARTICIPANT S:
 And you go through that whole process of mentally calming
yourself down and doing all that?
MARSHALL:
 Yes. So now I suffer for about thirty seconds instead of about three
hours. But I still get triggered. You see, there is this horrible breed of violent,
evil people called “people who don’t move fast enough.” When I want to get
through the ticket line, and I want to sit down and just relax, this breed of
people—these jerks—are all over the damn planet, and they’re placed here to
aggravate the hell out of me. There’s an international plot to test my patience
in my Nonviolent Communication.
PARTICIPANT S:
 So do you have a trick or a special trigger that you’ve come up
with? Do you count to ten or something?
MARSHALL:
 No, my anger is valuable. It’s really a blessing. When I’m angry, I
know I need to slow down and look at what I’m telling myself—I need to
translate the judgments that are making me angry and get in touch with my
needs.
PARTICIPANT S:
 So you believe anger is justified in certain situations?
MARSHALL:
 Anger is always justified in the sense that it’s the inevitable result of
life-alienated, violence-provocative thinking. Anger is not the problem. It’sthe thinking that’s going on in us when we’re angry that’s the problem.
PARTICIPANT S:
 And what is the process that you use to deal with it?
MARSHALL:
 I slow down, and I enjoy the judgment show going on in my head. I
don’t tell myself I “shouldn’t” think that way. That’s perpetuating it. I don’t
say it’s wrong. I don’t say to myself what my son once asked me, when I said
these judgmental thoughts out loud: “You go around the world teaching
communication?” I try not to say to myself, “I don’t think it’s justified.” I just
see it, connect with the need behind it, and give empathy to myself. I hear the
need behind this moralistic thinking.
 As an example, I might be frustrated because I’d like the line to go faster,
but in the ten minutes that I’m going to be in that line, I’m not going to be
putting additional stress on my heart. (By the way, research in the medical
arena shows a high correlation between “Type A” thinking, which is what I
call moralistic or judgmental thinking, and heart disease.) So I’d like to slow
down the stress on my heart to about thirty beats a second, rather than being in
that line for ten minutes, angry at the person up front who’s taking up all this
time talking to the ticket seller. “Don’t they know I’m back here?” I can let
this stress eat at my heart, or I can choose to really transform that frustration.
If I slow down, I can ask myself what could I do in those ten minutes? I could
carry something to read in the line.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Is the ultimate goal to not be perturbed by it at all? Is that where
you see yourself eventually?
MARSHALL:
 The ultimate goal is to spend as many of my moments in life as I can
in that world that the poet Rumi talks about, “a place beyond rightness and
wrongness.”
LEARNING TO DEAL WITH A DIFFICULT PERSON
PARTICIPANT S:
 Aside from right and wrong, I think we all have our conditioning,
a certain chemistry and openness toward some people and not toward others,
based on our upbringing, personal habits, and all. I often don’t know how to
genuinely feel open and warm to people who are different, really different,
from me. And I’m not necessarily just talking about racism. It might just be
people with different habits, different ways of going about things, and so I’m
confused about how to genuinely develop more tolerance. It’s more difficult in
this politically correct society that says we should be tolerant.
MARSHALL:
 First, get the word 
should 
out of there. As long as I think I “should”
do it, I’ll resist it, even if I want very much to do it. Hearing “should” from
inside or outside takes all the joy out of doing it. I try to never do anything Ishould do. Instead, I follow Joseph Campbell’s suggestion. After studying
comparative religion and mythology for forty-three years, Campbell said,
“You know, after all of my research, it’s amazing that all religions are saying
the same thing: don’t do anything that isn’t playful.” Don’t do anything that
isn’t play. He also said it another way: “Follow your bliss.” Come from this
energy of how to make the world fun and learnable.
 Let’s talk for a minute about “tolerance.” There are a lot of people I can’t
stand being around, and they are my best gurus. They teach me about what’s
going on in me that makes it hard to see the divine energy in them. I want to
learn from anything that keeps me from connecting to that energy. Fortunately,
there are a lot of people I can’t stand; I have a lot of learning opportunities. I
practice. I ask, “What do these people do that is a trigger for my judging
them?” First, I try to get clear about what they do, and, second, I try to be
conscious about how I’m judging those who make me so angry. The third step
is to look behind my judgment to see what particular need of mine is not
getting met in relation to those people. I try to give myself empathy for what
need of mine isn’t met in relation to them. Fourth, I say to myself, “When
people do that thing that I don’t like, what personal need are they trying to
meet?” I try to empathize with what’s alive in them when they do it. These
people whom I can’t stand are my best teachers of Nonviolent Communication
if I do that exercise with them.
ANGER TOWARD MOTHERS
PARTICIPANT S:
 I would like to know if you would be willing to help me with
some healing with my mother? I’m going to be visiting her for Thanksgiving.
MARSHALL:
 Let’s do it. I’ll be your mother, and you play yourself.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Well, son, I’ve got my empathy ears on now, and I
would like very much to hear anything that’s alive in you that makes it less
than totally enjoyable for you to be around me.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Where do I begin?
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Oh, good, there’s a lot I can learn.
PARTICIPANT S:
 I’m so frustrated and angry and discouraged, and I feel despair
around how negative you are, how you’re always looking at things to criticize
about the world, about me, about life, about the government. I’m angry that
you painted this picture that the world is a horrible place and then said it to me
and to my sisters.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Let me see if I can get that. I hear two important
messages in there that I don’t want to miss. First, if I’m hearing you correctly,you’d like some understanding about how painful it is for you to be around me
when I’m in so much pain and how it leaves you constantly feeling under
some pressure to have some way to deal with my pain.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yes.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 And the second thing I’m hearing that you’d like from
me is some understanding of how much pain you carry with you from having
been exposed to this for so long, that you’d like not to have so much pain in
how you see things.
PARTICIPANT S:
 That’s partly accurate. I’m angry because it feels like I have to
fight inside of myself, to protect my own ability to choose, to perceive things
the way I want.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 So how wonderful it would be if you didn’t have to
work so hard to live in a world that is quite different from the one that I
painted for you.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yeah.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Yeah. How much you’d like to live in that other world
and how sad it is to see how much of your energy goes into the one that I
helped you learn to live in.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yeah, and this sounds blaming—and it is—but that’s where I am
right now.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 I can’t hear blame, son. I have my NVC ears on. All I
can hear is beauty.
PARTICIPANT S:
 I’m angry that you’re just in so much pain that’s all you
present, and that you didn’t say, “I’m in a lot of pain, but you don’t have to
be.” And I’m angry that I wasn’t given any encouragement to choose a
different way of looking at the world, and when I do present a different way,
you feel threatened, and you try to devalue and diminish what I perceive.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 I want to reflect that, to check with you to see whether it
could have at least made things more bearable for you, if while I was in this
pain, I could’ve said, “Hey, this is just how I look at it, and I’m not
encouraging you to see it this way.” But instead I presented it in a way that
sounded like this is the way the world is, and as a child you internalized that.
And that is now what makes it so hard for you to live in the world of your
choosing, rather than the one I painted for you.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yes. And I go into that child place a lot when I’m with you. I
don’t have the distance that I feel like I need to be able to say, “Ah, that’s just
my mom.” It still feels like it threatens my autonomy to hear your feelings.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Yeah, you hear those feelings, and you lose connection
with the world you want to be in, and you go into this world that I painted foryou.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yeah. And I’m worried because I’m going to visit you on
Thanksgiving, and I know a lot of the strategies that I’ve used in the past are
still alive in me, like nodding my head up and down, pretending to listen when
I’m really angry and I’ve actually left my body. I’m too scared to express my
real feelings, and I’m worried that I’m going to do that again. And I’m
worried that if I do try to be authentic with you, that I’m going to be criticized
for having these feelings.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 You hate to be in this situation, where the only two
options you can imagine are hiding yourself or trying to be honest and making
a bigger mess. You’d really like there to be some other connection between us
besides that.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yeah. And I’m worried about the part of me that is so hurt about
this that I want to shame you and make you wrong.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 How you suffered is so strong in you that you
desperately need this understanding of how much you’ve paid for this.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yeah. Yeah. Being authentic and making a mess isn’t the thing
that scares me the most though, because I have some training in being able to
clean it up. What I hate about myself is that I can freeze up and just not be
there. And not take care of myself and not speak up. I’m worried about that
tendency.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 So, as uncomfortable as it is for you to imagine
speaking up and having to clean up the mess, that’s less toxic for you than
continuing to hide yourself and not express yourself—as scary as it is to do
that.
PARTICIPANT S:
 I have a lot of pain about internalizing the labels “too sensitive”
and “hypersensitive”—the labels that you use to express your being
overwhelmed when you hear my feelings.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Yeah, yeah, yeah. You wish you could hear through that
and hear my pain without hearing any criticism, but it’s a real strain for you to
do that.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yeah.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Is there more you’d like me to hear before I respond?
PARTICIPANT S:
 I’m really worried about how much pain is still alive in me and
how that comes out as me wanting to make you wrong, wanting to shame you
and beat you up for what I perceive you did to me.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Yeah, the pain is so strong in you, and you need to get it
out. But you’re afraid that the only way it might come out is going to be
interpreted by me in a way that will make both of us even more distant fromone another. And that’s not what you want. But you do want to be able to get
that pain out and dealt with.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yeah, I’m worried about intellectualizing. I wish I had the
permission, the psychic permission, to just scream and stamp my feet and not
say any words. I’d like to have that heard, because we get into our heads, and
I hate that.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Yeah. So, you want to be sure that if we do use words,
that they really connect us to life and not take us farther from it. And at the
moment, it’s hard to imagine any words that would do that. It seems like to get
all the pain out, you just have to scream or stomp or something.
PARTICIPANT S:
 And I’m also connected to a part of me that just wants to come
home and get the nurturing that I did not get as a child in this family, and I’m
worried that’s not a very realistic need to try to get met in this family.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 So there’s more than just resolving all this pain. You
really have a dream of a nurturing relationship, of feeling you’re valued, of
enjoying our being with one another. That seems so far off, given all the pain
that you’re going through, that it’s hard to even imagine we could get to that
stage of really being nurturing for one another.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Uh-huh. To be honest, it’s hard to imagine you ever giving that,
because you’re so caught up in your own suffering.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Yeah. So hard to even imagine. Is there anything more
you want me to hear before I respond?
PARTICIPANT S:
 You know, if you talk about how much you hate the president,
even if I agree with you, I don’t want to hear it, and I’d rather punch you in
the face.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 So, whatever I’m talking about, whether it’s the
president or something else, as soon as you see me in pain, you get yourself in
such pain that it’s not a place you want to continue to be in.
PARTICIPANT S:
 I don’t have any idea why, intellectually, but just hearing you
vent your judgments about people pisses me off. I don’t want to be a sounding
board for your storytelling. If I saw you releasing your pain and getting
empathy for that, it would be a different story, but …
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 You’re fed up with feeling that somehow you have to
heal that pain, but not knowing how to do it and getting yourself down. You
want something else out of any relationship you’re in, besides being in that
role. You’re tired of having to listen to it and then somehow make me feel
better.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Uh-huh. I wish I could find a way to enjoy it. You know?
Hearing your judgments versus the way I hear a friend’s judgments. You and Isometimes have a party hurting one another. And I’m not there, because I
have this critical voice inside telling me it’s my responsibility.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 You’re aware that part of the issue is telling yourself that
somehow you need to fix me, your mom. But also you want me to see that
there are things that I say and do that provoke that.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Yeah, it would feel really nice for me if you said, “You know,
I’ve got some pain, and I’d like to vent. Can I have an ear?” To actually ask
for permission. Then I could get my needs met for respect. MARSHALL, AS
MOTHER: Yeah. I’d like to respond now. Can you hear me, or would you like
me to hear more of you?
PARTICIPANT S:
 I can say a lot more, but I feel okay about hearing you now.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 Well, I’m so relieved that you haven’t given up on our
relationship, that you still are working at finding a way to make it not only
bearable but also nurturing. And I’m sure you’ve been close to giving up on it.
I can’t tell you what a gift it is—that despite the pain you’re telling me about,
you’re still looking for hope, some glimmer that we can learn to nurture one
another.
PARTICIPANT S:
 I don’t know that I have that hope, but I know that if I work on
this a little bit, I’ll have better relationships with women.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 So even if you can’t imagine getting nurture from me,
you would hope at least that you could with other women.
 There’s so much I want to tell you that’s stimulated in me by what you’ve
said, but, at the moment, there’s just a horrible sadness to see that I handled
my pain in a way that didn’t meet one of the needs that I’ve had my whole life,
the strongest need that I can think of: to nurture you. And to see that instead of
nurturing you in a way that I would’ve liked, I’ve been a stimulus for so much
pain for you. It’s enormously frightening to look at my depth of sadness about
that. It’s one thing that I had to suffer myself, but to have contributed to all this
pain in you, that’s a really, really painful sadness to look at. And I’d like to
know how you feel when you hear me say that.
PARTICIPANT S:
 I feel kind of numb. I think I’m protecting myself.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 That’s what I was afraid of, that even now you feel that
you have to do something about it. I really do want you to know that, with
these ears on, all I want is empathy. Nothing else. And if you can’t give it, I
can hear that without hearing it as a rejection or creating more pain.
 So I can hear that you’re kind of numb and part of you wants to resonate to
it, but part of you is afraid of getting into the old now-you-have-to-do-
something-about-it.
 Now, I’d like to tell you what goes on in me when I’ve been acting the wayI have over the years. When I hear how you would’ve liked for me to have
said it, really I want to cry because it makes me aware that I would’ve liked to
have said it in that way. Then I ask myself what kept me from doing it, and
that’s when I want to cry. I can’t even imagine that anyone really cares about
what’s going on for me. And then what you said helped me realize that I’ve
been asking for it in a way that leads to self-fulfilling prophecies. The way
I’ve been asking for it, how can anybody enjoy giving it to me? And I just felt
such a depth of sadness that I didn’t know other ways of saying, “Hey, I’m in
pain, and I need some attention.”
 I don’t want you to take responsibility for my pain. I just need somehow to
feel that somebody cares about what’s going on for me. The only way I knew
to ask for that provoked just the opposite from almost everybody, going back
to the time I was a child. I never had the feeling that my needs mattered to
somebody. Therefore, to ask for it in a way the other person might enjoy
hearing it wasn’t a possibility. I just get desperate and express it in the only
way I know how: out of desperation. And then I see how it affects other
people, and I get even more desperate.
 I’d like to know how you feel when I tell you that.
PARTICIPANT S:
 Sad, but somewhat relieved to be able to hear some of what was
behind the urgency of your expression. I feel some relief in just connecting
with it.
MARSHALL, AS MOTHER:
 I’m feeling very vulnerable about our revelation of
ourselves. How would you feel if I asked the group for their reaction to what
we’ve been saying?
PARTICIPANT S:
 I’d probably enjoy that.
MARSHALL, AS HIMSELF:
 Okay, does anybody have any feelings or reactions to
our dialogue?
Reactions to the Role-Play
PARTICIPANT R:
 Somehow, it just makes my heart smile to see men being so
responsive in such a compassionate way. This is a new kind of experience for
me.
MARSHALL:
 [Jokingly.] We’re not 
real 
men.
PARTICIPANT R:
 Your modeling it for me opens up a possibility for a way for men
to act. So I’m grateful.
PARTICIPANT T:
 I, too, am grateful. It really touched my heart deeply, because my
mother and I have a similar dynamic, one that I’ve not found an effective way
to deal with. I’ve just kind of gone to a place of hopelessness about it. As I
was listening to Marshall mourn in the mother role, with the sadness over howher intention was for her son to be happy and how important that was to her, I
felt some healing for me, knowing that’s what’s important to my mother—that
it was never her intention to make my life hard. It was healing for me to hear
what she may have been going through and to hear your dialogue. I really
appreciate that.
PARTICIPANT U:
 Well, I feel very grateful for the experience, because I could
really sense the humanity behind the words.
 I don’t know if anybody’s heard about “vibrations,” but I felt something at
one point that took away the separateness between me and each person in this
room. I felt really connected. And on the other side, I’m a little sad, because I
really would like to see people—myself included— happy, you know? And
I’m realizing what you were saying when you were role-playing the mother:
that there is something that blocks the humanity in each one of us, and it’s
amazing how quickly a solution can happen once one or maybe both persons
are able to open up. I think the technique helps a lot, but it’s also about your
ability to connect with your heart; it’s about the presence I felt. Like believing
in God. I think that’s a good description of what I felt in the moment. Thank
you very much.
PARTICIPANT S:
 What’s alive in me is my sadness, identifying with you,
recognizing that I’ve given up on healing my relationship with my own
mother … how I was just going to heal my relationship with women without
having to heal with my mother. And how I don’t know how to approach her,
or even if I can or should, because I don’t think she could really respond like
that to me.
MARSHALL:
 How do you think she would respond upon hearing this recording?
PARTICIPANT S:
 I don’t know. It has been healing for me; maybe it would heal her
or something.
MARSHALL:
 I’d like you to try it, and if it works beautifully I’d like you to call
me and tell me. And if it messes things up, call my staff.
PARTICIPANT R:
 I also feel some hope after hearing that—not that I could stay
with feelings and needs the whole time by any means, but I just feel some
hope. Even if I screw it up, there’s some hope and energy to try with my own
brother, the same kind of thing. Thank you.
MARSHALL’S MOTHER’S GIFT TO HIM
MARSHALL:
 I’d like to share with you a gift I received. I had very similar pain in
relationship to my mother, and you were speaking like it was me. I want to tell
you about some major surgery that I had that helped me get out of it—notsurgery done on me, but that my mother had at a workshop of mine that she
attended.
 In the workshop, women in the group were talking about how scary it was
for them as women to express needs directly and how much their personal
relationships with men were getting all mucked up because of it. The only way
they knew how to express needs got the opposite of what they wanted. Then
they got more bitter, which made it worse.
 One woman after another was saying how hard it was for her to express her
need. My mother got up and went to the bathroom. I started to worry because
she was in there a really long time. When she came out, I noticed how pale she
was, and I asked, “Mother, are you all right?” She said, “Now I am. It was
very upsetting for me to hear the discussion, because when I heard the women
talking about how hard it was for them to express their needs, it reminded me
of something.” I said, “Do you mind telling me what it was, Mother?”
 She told me this story: “When I was fourteen, my sister, your aunt Minnie,
had her appendix taken out. Your aunt Alice bought her a little purse. How I
cherished that purse, what I wouldn’t have given for that purse, but in our
family you never asked for what you wanted or needed. If you did, you would
hear back from one of the older kids, ‘You know how poor we are. Why are
you asking for what you need?’ But I wanted it so badly that I started to
complain of pains in my side. They took me to two doctors who couldn’t find
anything, but the third one said maybe we should do exploratory surgery.”
 They took out my mother’s appendix. And it worked: my aunt Alice bought
her a purse just like the one that my mother wanted but couldn’t ask for.
 But that wasn’t the end of it. Mother told me, “I was lying in bed in the
hospital in a lot of pain, but I was so happy. The nurse came in and stuck a
thermometer in my mouth and then went out. Then another nurse came in. I
wanted her to see my purse, but I could only say ‘Mmmm, mmmm, mmmm’
because of the thing in my mouth. The nurse said, ‘For me? Thank you,’ and
she took the purse. And I couldn’t ask for it back.”
 That was such a gift that my mother gave me, because just seeing how hard
it was for her to express her needs, what she would go through, helped me see
everything I hated her for. I understood that when she asked for the things that
just aggravated the hell out of me, there was desperation behind it. I could see
why she couldn’t just come out and say it. So that major surgery helped shake
me out of that. That really helped.
PARTICIPANT T:
 Participant S, I really appreciate your willingness to be
vulnerable and to express all your anger and your hurt and your pain. You may
be surprised that your mother may be willing and anxious to open that up. I’mgoing to buy the recording and take it to my son.
PARTICIPANT S, TO MARSHALL:
 Could you say a few things that would bring some
closure to my dialogue with you? I’m thinking about getting the recording and
playing it for my mother when I visit her, and that idea brings up a lot of fear.
What I’m telling myself is, we said some pretty strong, harsh things in the
dialogue, and although I don’t have any hope that I can have a better
relationship with my mom, I’m worried that she might not be able to hear that
as me just venting in the moment.
MARSHALL:
 That’s the danger. But if she stays with it long enough and sees how
I heard the beauty behind it, she’ll also be learning Nonviolent
Communication.
PARTICIPANT S:
 I just realized that before playing the recording, I can explain to
her that some of the things I said were said just for the purpose of expressing
the really strong emotion in the moment. She understands that very well. She
taught me that.
MARSHALL:
 And then you can say, “And Mother, I’d like you to see how
Marshall handled it in your role. And I’d like you to tell me afterward how
you felt about how he played your role. How he dealt with it when I called
you these names.”
PARTICIPANT S:
 I’m worried she might want you for a son.
PARTICIPANT R:
 I want Marshall for a mother.
SUMMARY
There are 
four primary stages 
in creating a bridge of empathy between people
seeking healing or reconciliation in a significant relationship.
Stage One: Empathic Connection
 1. 
Being present: 
I extend empathy to a person who is hurting, angry, or
frightened by being fully present to what is alive in that person, without
offering any judgment, diagnosis, or advice.
 2. 
Connecting with and checking out current feelings and needs:
 I do so
out loud 
only if:
 • my intention is to verify that I have accurately understood and
connected with the person, and
 
• I sense that the person shared
vulnerably and may appreciate verbal empathy from me. My focus is
on what is alive in that person right now (as a result of what happened
in the past) rather than on the story and past events.
 3. 
Staying in empathy: 
I stay with the person until I receive visible signsthat the person is finished (e.g., a sense of relief or a quieting down).
 4. 
Checking in: 
I ask, “Is there more you’d like to say?”
 5. 
Receive postempathic request: 
What would the person like from me in
this moment? (Information? Advice? To know how I feel after having
heard them speak?)
 
Remember to distinguish between empathy and
sympathy. With empathy, I am fully present with others while 
they 
are
feeling their feelings. With sympathy, I am back home feeling my own
feelings.
Stage Two: Mourning in NVC requires becoming conscious of my current unmet needs as a
result of specific choices I made in the past. For example, in the role-play
between the brother and sister, the brother says: “Sister, when I see how my
actions have contributed to your pain, I feel very sad. It didn’t meet my need to
nurture and support you in a way I really would’ve liked.” As he mourns, the
brother also connects with the feeling that now arises (sadness) from those
unmet needs (to nurture and support the sister).
NVC mourning is not apologizing. Apologies are based on moralistic
judgments involving admission of wrongdoing and the implication that some
form of suffering will “make it right.” In NVC mourning, I ask myself whether
my action met my needs. If not, I ask myself which needs I didn’t meet and how
I am feeling about it.
Stage Three: Acknowledgment of Past Needs (That Led Me to Behave as I
Did)
Following the stages of empathic connection and mourning, the earnest question
I may hear asked of me is, “But why did you do it?” I make certain that the
person has received all the empathy needed before moving to this next stage,
where I address the question by connecting with the needs that I was trying to
meet when I behaved as I had.
For example, in the mother–son role-play, after the mother empathized with
the son and then mourned in his presence, she acknowledged what had led her to
behave toward her family the way she had: “I never had the feeling that my
needs mattered to somebody. I just got desperate and expressed it in the only
way I knew how: out of desperation. And then I saw how it affected other
people, and I got even more desperate. I just felt such a depth of sadness that I
didn’t know other ways of saying, ‘Hey, I’m in pain, and I need some
attention.’”
Just as mourning is distinct from apologizing, the mother’s compassionateself-forgiveness based on connecting to her past feelings (desperation, pain) and
needs (for caring attention and “to matter”) is distinct from rationalization or
denial of responsibility.
Stage Four: Reverse Empathy
After the person in pain has received full empathy, has heard my mourning, and
has understood the needs I was trying to meet through my behavior, that person
will feel a natural desire to turn around and empathize with me. When this
happens, we will have completed the final stage of healing. It is critical,
however, that this occurs only when there is a genuine urge on the other person’s
part to empathize with me. Any sense of pressure or a premature invitation will
simply contribute to furthering that person’s pain.
Editor’s note: In the transcribed workshop used for this chapter, Marshall makes
reference to, but does not demonstrate through role-plays, this final stage of
healing.
4
 
T
HE
 S
URPRISING
 P
URPOSE OF
 A
NGER
Beyond Anger Management—Finding the Gift
 
I
n this chapter, I would like to share my perspective on the role anger can play
in our lives. I hope to challenge you to shift away from the idea that anger is
something to be suppressed. Instead, anger is a gift, challenging us to connect to
the unmet needs that have triggered this reaction. I reveal common
misconceptions about anger and how our anger is the product of thinking. A
discussion of anger easily supports a better understanding of NVC, because it
touches on so many key NVC distinctions. Living from your heart, making
judgment-free observations, getting clear about your feelings and needs, making
clear requests, and supporting life-enriching connections all relate to how you
respond to anger.
ANGER AND NVC
When it comes to managing anger, NVC shows how to use anger as an alarm
that tells us we are thinking in ways that are not likely to get our needs met and
are more likely to get us involved in interactions that are not going to be very
constructive for anyone. NVC training stresses that 
it is dangerous to think of
anger as something to be repressed or as something bad. 
When we identify
anger as a result of something wrong with us, our tendency is to want to repress
it and not deal with it. That use of anger—to repress and deny it—often leads us
to express it in ways that can be very dangerous to ourselves and others.
Think of how many times you’ve read in the newspapers about serial killers
and how people who knew them described them. A rather typical description is,
“He was always such a nice person. I never heard him raise his voice. He never
seemed to be angry at anyone.” In NVC, we are interested in using anger to helpus get at the needs that are not being fulfilled within ourselves, that are at the
root of our anger.
Many of the groups I work with around the world have witnessed the
consequences of teaching that anger is something to be repressed. These groups
have seen that when people are taught that anger should be avoided, it can be
used to oppress them by getting them to tolerate whatever is happening.
However, I also have reservations about how, in response to that concern, some
have advocated cultivating or “venting” anger without understanding its roots
and transforming it. Some studies have indicated that anger-management
programs that simply encourage participants to vent anger—by, for example,
beating pillows—just push the anger closer to the surface and, in fact, leave the
participants more susceptible to expressing their anger later in ways that are
dangerous to themselves and others.
What we want to do as we use NVC to manage anger is to go more deeply
into it, to see what is going on within us when we are angry, to be able to get at
the need—which is the root of anger—and then fulfill that need. For teaching
purposes, I sometimes refer to anger as being similar to the warning light on the
dashboard of a car—it’s providing useful information about what the engine
needs. You wouldn’t want to hide or disconnect or ignore it. You’d want to slow
down the car and figure out what the light’s trying to tell you.
It Works Even If Only One Person Applies It has been my experience that if I can keep my attention on anger as a warning,
no matter how the other person is communicating, then we both remain
connected. In other words, NVC works even if only one person applies it.
It’s not too hard to keep the focus in this direction. However, it can be scary,
because it always requires vulnerability on our part to nakedly say how we are
and what we would like. The process can flow fairly well when both parties are
trained in it, but almost everyone I work with is attempting to establish this flow
of communication with someone who is not likely to ever come to NVC
workshops. So it’s very important that this process work with anyone, whether or
not they have been trained to communicate this way.
One thing we stress in our intensive training is how to stay with this process,
regardless of how other people communicate. In one sense, anger is a fun way to
dive more deeply into NVC, even if you are starting with this process for the
first time. When you’re angry, it brings many aspects of the NVC process into
sharp focus, helping you see the difference between NVC and other forms of
communication.
The NVC approach to anger involves several steps. I will go over these stepsby using an example of a young man in a prison in Sweden. I was working with
this man in a prisoner training session, showing the participants how NVC can
be used to manage anger.
FOUR STEPS TO HANDLING ANGER The First Step
The first step
The first step in handling anger using NVC is to be conscious that 
the stimulus,
or trigger, of the anger is not the cause of the anger. 
In other words, it isn’t
simply what people do that makes us angry, it’s actually something within us that
responds to what they do—that is really the cause of the anger. This step requires
us to be able to separate the trigger from the cause.
In the situation with the prisoner, the very day that we were focusing on anger,
he had a lot of anger in relationship to the prison authorities. So he was very glad
to have us there to help him deal with his anger.
I asked him what the prison authorities had done that was the stimulus of his
anger. He answered, “I made a request of them three weeks ago, and they still
haven’t responded.” He had answered the question in the way that I wanted him
to. He had simply told me what they had 
done. 
He hadn’t mixed in any
evaluation, and that is the first step in managing anger in a nonviolent way:
simply be clear about what the stimulus is, but don’t mix that up with judgments
or evaluation. This alone is an important accomplishment. Frequently when I ask
such a question, I get a response such as, “They were inconsiderate,” which is a
moral judgment of what they “are” but that doesn’t say what they actually did.
The Second Step
The second step involves being conscious that the stimulus is never the cause of
anger. That is, it isn’t simply what people do that makes us angry. 
It is our
evaluation of what has been done that is the cause of our anger. 
This is a
particular kind of evaluation. NVC is built on the premise that anger is the result
of life-alienated ways of evaluating what is happening to us. It isn’t directly
connected to what we need or what the people around us need. Instead, it is
based on ways of thinking that imply wrongness or badness on the part of others
for what they have done.
Evaluating Triggers that Lead to Anger
There are four ways to evaluate any anger triggers that occur in our lives. In the
case of the prison officials not responding for three weeks to his request, the
prisoner could have looked at the situation and taken it personally, as a rejection.Had he done that, he would not have been angry. He might have felt hurt, he
might have felt discouraged, but he wouldn’t have felt angry.
As a second possibility, he could have looked within himself and seen what
his needs were. Focusing directly on needs is a way of thinking that is most
likely to get them met. As we will see later, had he been focused directly on his
needs, he would not have been angry. He might have felt scared, which it turned
out he was once he got in touch with his needs.
A third possibility is that he could have looked at things in terms of what
needs the prison officials were experiencing that led them to behave as they did.
This kind of understanding of the needs of others does not leave us feeling
angry. In fact, when we are really directly connected with the needs of others—at
the point at which we understand their needs— we are not really in touch with
any feelings within ourselves, because our full attention is on the needs of
others.
The fourth way he could have looked at things—which we will find is always
at the base of anger—is to think in terms of the wrongness of the prison officials
for behaving as they did. In NVC, whenever we feel angry, we say to ourselves,
“I’m feeling angry because I am telling myself __________,” and then we look
for the kind of life-alienated thinking going on inside our head that is the cause
of our anger.
In the case of the prisoner, when he told me he was angry and the trigger for
his anger was that the prison officials hadn’t responded for three weeks to his
request, I asked him to look inside and tell me what the cause of his anger was.
He seemed confused and said to me, “I just told you the cause of my anger. I
made a request three weeks ago, and the prison officials still haven’t responded
to it.”
I told him, “What you have told me is the trigger for your anger. In our
previous sessions, I tried to clarify that it’s never simply the trigger that creates
our anger. The cause is what we’re looking for. So I’d like you to tell me how
you are interpreting their behavior—how you are looking at it—that is causing
you to be angry.”
He was very confused at this point. Like many of us, he had not been trained
to be conscious of what was going on within himself when he was angry. So I
had to give him a little help to give him an idea of what I meant by just stopping
and listening to the thoughts that might be going on inside of his head and that
are always at the core of anger.
After a few moments, he said to me, “OK, I see what you mean. I’m angry
because I’m telling myself it isn’t fair, that it isn’t a decent way to treat human
beings. They are acting as though they are important, and I’m nothing.” He hadseveral other such judgments floating rapidly through his head. Notice he
initially said it was simply their behavior that was making him angry, when, in
fact, it was really all these thoughts that he had within himself that were making
him angry, any one of which could have created his anger. And he had been
ready with a whole series of such judgments: “They’re not fair; they’re not
treating me right.” All such judgments are the cause of anger.
Once we had identified this, he said to me, “Well, what’s wrong with thinking
that way?”
I replied, “I’m not saying there’s anything wrong with thinking that way. I’d
just like you to be conscious that thinking that way is the cause of your anger.
And we don’t want to mix up what people do—the trigger— with the cause of
anger.”
Trigger Versus Cause
This idea can be very hard to keep straight: to not mix up the trigger, or stimulus,
of anger with the cause of anger. The reason that it’s not easy is that many of us
were educated by people who use guilt as a primary form of motivation. If you
want to use guilt to manipulate people, you first need to confuse them into
thinking that the trigger is the cause of the feeling. In other words, if you want to
use guilt with somebody, you need to communicate in a way that indicates that
your pain is being caused simply by what they do. This means that their behavior
is not simply the stimulus of your feelings, but it’s also the cause of your
feelings.
If you are a guilt-inducing parent, you might say to a child, “It really hurts me
when you don’t clean up you room.” Or if you are a guilt-inducing partner in an
intimate relationship, you might say to your partner, “It makes me angry when
you go out every night of the week.” Notice in both of these examples that the
speaker is implying that the stimulus is the cause of the feelings: “You make me
feel.” “That makes me feel.” “I’m feeling _______ because you _______.”
In order to manage anger in ways that are in harmony with the principles of
NVC, it’s important to be conscious of this key distinction: 
I feel as I do 
because
I am telling myself thoughts about other people’s actions that imply wrongness
on their part. 
Such thoughts take the form of judgments, such as, “I think they
are selfish, I think the person is rude, or lazy, or manipulative, and they shouldn’t
do that.” Such thoughts take either the form of direct judgment of others or
indirect judgments expressed through such things as, “I’m judging them as
thinking only they have something worth saying.”
In these latter expressions, it’s implicit that we think what the other person is
doing isn’t right. And that’s important, because if I think this other person ismaking me feel this way, it’s going to be hard for me not to imagine punishing
them. NVC shows people that it’s never what the other person does; instead, it’s
how you see it, how you interpret it. If people were to follow me around in my
work, they would get some very significant learning in this area.
For example, I worked a lot in Rwanda. I often worked with people who had
members of their family killed. Some were so angry that all they could do was
wait for vengeance. They were furious. Other people in the same room had the
same number of family members killed—maybe had even more killed—but they
were not angry. They had strong feelings, but not anger. They had feelings that
led them to want to prevent the killings from ever happening to others again, but
not that led them to punish the other side. With NVC, we want people to see that
it’s how we look at the situation that 
creates 
our anger; it’s not the stimulus
itself.
With NVC training, I try to get people to see that when they’re angry, it’s
because their consciousness is under the influence of the kind of language we all
learned—that is, that the other side is evil or bad in some way. This kind of
thinking is the cause of anger. When this thinking happens, I show people not
how to push it down and deny the anger or deny the thinking, but rather to
transform it into a language of life, into a language in which they are much more
likely to create peace between themselves and whoever acted in the way that
stimulated their anger.
To do this, let’s talk first about how to become conscious of the internalized
thinking that’s making you angry, how to transform it into what needs of yours
have not been met by what the other person has done. Then let’s look at how to
proceed from that consciousness to creating peace again between you and that
person.
The first step in expressing your anger—managing it in harmony with NVC—
is to identify the stimulus for your anger without confusing it with your
evaluation. The second step is to be conscious that it is your evaluation of people
—in the form of judgments that imply wrongness— that causes your anger.
An Illustration of Stimulus Versus Cause of Anger
Once when I was working in a correctional school for delinquents, I had an
experience that really helped me learn the lesson that it is never the stimulus that
causes the anger. There is always, between the trigger and the anger, some
thought process happening.
On two successive days, I had remarkably similar experiences, but each day I
had quite different feelings in reaction to the experience. The experience in both
situations involved my being hit in the nose, because on two successive days Iwas involved in breaking up a fight between two different pairs of students. And
in both cases, as I was breaking up the fight, I caught an elbow in the nose.
On day one, I was furious. On day two, even though the nose was even sorer
than it had been on the first day, I wasn’t angry. Now, why would I be angry in
response to the stimulus on day one, but not on day two?
First of all, in the first situation, if you had asked me right after I was hit in the
nose why I was angry, I would have had trouble finding the thought that was
making me angry. I probably would have said, “Well, I’m obviously angry
because the child hit me in the nose.” But that wasn’t the cause. As I looked at
the situation later, it was very clear to me that even before this incident, I had
been thinking in very judgmental terms about the child whose elbow hit me in
the nose. I had in my head a judgment of this child as a spoiled brat. So as soon
as his elbow hit my nose, I was angry—it seemed that just as the elbow hit, I
became angry. But between that stimulus and the anger, this image flashed
within me of this child being a spoiled brat. Now, that all happened very fast, but
it was the image of “spoiled brat” that made me angry.
On day two, I carried quite a different image of the child into the situation.
Now I saw this child more as a pathetic creature than a spoiled brat; so when the
elbow caught my nose, I wasn’t angry. I certainly felt physical pain, but I wasn’t
angry, because a different image flashed through my mind: one of a child in
great need of support rather than the judgmental image “spoiled brat” that had
caused the anger.
These images happen very quickly, and they can easily trick us into thinking
that the stimulus is the cause of our anger.
The Third Step
The third step in handling anger with NVC involves looking for the need that is
the root of anger. This step is built on the assumption that we get angry because
our needs are not getting met, and the problem is that we’re not in touch with our
needs. Instead of being directly connected to our need, we go up into our head
and start thinking of what’s wrong with other people for not meeting our needs.
The judgments we make of other people—which cause our anger—are really
alienated expressions of unmet needs.
Judgments
Over the years, I have come to see that these kinds of judgments of others that
make us angry are not only alienated expressions of our needs; at times, they
also look to me like suicidal, tragic expressions of our needs. Instead of going to
our heart to connect to what we need and are not getting, we direct our attentionto judging what is wrong with other people for not meeting our needs. When we
do this, a couple of things are likely to happen.
First, our needs are not likely to get met, because when we verbally judge
other people as being wrong in some way, these judgments usually create more
defensiveness than learning or connection. At the very least, they don’t create
much cooperation. Even if people do things we would like them to do after we
have judged them as being wrong or lazy or irresponsible, they will take these
actions with an energy that we will pay for. We will pay for it because when we
are angry as a result of judging people—and we express these judgments to them
either verbally or through our nonverbal behavior—they pick up that we are
judging them as being wrong in some way. Even if people then do what we
would like them to do, they are likely to be motivated more out of fear of being
punished, out of fear of being judged, or out of their guilt or shame than out of
compassion in relation to our needs.
When we use NVC, however, we remain conscious at all times that why
people do what we would like them to do is as important as the fact that they do
it. So we are conscious that we only want people to do things willingly and not
do things because they think they’re going to be punished, blamed, guilted, or
shamed if they don’t.
Developing a Literacy of Needs
This practice requires developing a literacy and a consciousness of our needs.
With a greater vocabulary of needs, we can more easily get in touch with the
needs behind the judgments that are making us angry. It’s when we can clearly
express our needs that others have a much greater likelihood of responding
compassionately to whatever it is we would like.
Let’s go back to the case of the prisoner in Sweden. After we had identified
the judgments he was making that were creating his anger, I asked him to look
behind the judgments and tell me what needs of his were not getting met. These
unmet needs were actually being expressed through the judgments he was
making of the prison officials.
This wasn’t easy for him to do, because when people are trained to think in
terms of wrongness of others, they are often blind to what they themselves need.
They often have very little vocabulary for describing their needs. It requires
shifting attention away from judging outward to looking inward and seeing what
the need is. But with some help, he was finally able to get in touch with his need,
and he said, “Well, my need is to be able to take care of myself when I get out of
prison by being able to get work. So the request that I was making of the prison
officials was for training to meet that need. If I don’t get that training, I’m notgoing to be able to take care of myself economically when I get out of prison,
and I’m going to end up back in here.”
Then I said to the prisoner, “Now that you’re in touch with your need, how are
you feeling?” He said, “I’m scared.” So when we are directly connected to our
need, we are 
never 
angry any more. The anger hasn’t been repressed; the anger
has been transformed into need-serving feelings.
The basic function of feelings is to serve our needs. The word 
emotion
basically means to move us out, to mobilize us to meet our needs. When we have
a need for some nourishment, we have a feeling that we label as hunger, and that
sensation stimulates us to move about to take care of our need for food. If we
just felt comfortable each time we had a need for nourishment, we could starve,
because we wouldn’t be mobilized to get our need met.
The natural function of emotions is to stimulate us to get our needs met. But
anger is stimulated by a diversion. With anger, we are not in touch with the
needs that would naturally motivate us to want to get our needs met. The anger is
created by thinking about the wrongness of others, which transfers this energy
away from seeking to get the need met and into an energy designed to blame and
punish other people.
After I pointed out to the prisoner the difference between getting in touch with
his needs and the feelings that he had, he became aware of his fear. He could see
that the anger was because of him thinking about the wrongness of others. I then
asked him, “Do you think you’re more likely to get your needs met if, when you
go to talk to the prison officials, you are connected to your needs and the fear, or
if you are up in your head judging them and angry?”
He could see very clearly that he was much more likely to get his needs met if
he were to communicate from a position of connection to his needs, rather than
being separated from his needs and thinking of others in ways that implied
wrongness. At the moment he had this insight into what a different world he
would be living in if he stayed in touch with his needs as opposed to judging
others, he looked down at the floor with one of the saddest looks I had ever seen.
I asked him, “What’s going on?”
He said, “I can’t talk about it right now.” Later that day, he helped me
understand. He came to me and said, “Marshall, I wish you could have taught
me two years ago what you taught me this morning about anger. I wouldn’t have
had to kill my best friend.”
Tragically, two years before, his best friend had done some things, and he felt
great rage in response to his judgments about what his friend had done. But
instead of being conscious of what his needs were behind all of that, he really
thought it was his friend who had made him angry, and in a tragic interaction, heended up killing the friend.
I’m not implying that every time we get angry we hurt or kill somebody. But I
am suggesting that every time we are angry, we are disconnected from our needs.
We are up in our head, thinking about the situation in a way that is going to
make it very hard for us to get our needs met.
The step that I have just outlined is very important: we must be conscious of
the thinking that is creating our anger. As I said, the prisoner at first was totally
oblivious to all of the inner thoughts that were making him angry. The reason is
that these thoughts go on very rapidly. Many of these thoughts go so quickly
through our head, we are not even aware they are there. Instead, it seems as
though it was the stimulus that caused our anger.
I have outlined three steps in managing anger using NVC:
 1. Identify the stimulus for anger, without confusing it with the evaluation.
 2. Identify the internal image or judgment that is making you angry.
 3. Transform this judgmental image into the need that it is expressing; in
other words, bring your full attention to the need that is behind the
judgment.
These three steps are done internally—nothing is said out loud. Instead, you
simply become aware that your anger is not caused by what the other person has
done, but rather by your judgment. Then it’s time to look for the need behind the
judgment.
The Fourth Step
The fourth step in handling anger involves what is actually said out loud to the
other person after anger has been transformed into other feelings by getting in
touch with the need behind the judgment.
This fourth step includes saying to the other person four pieces of information.
First, reveal the stimulus: what that person has done that is in conflict with your
needs being fulfilled. Second, express how you are feeling. Notice you are not
repressing the anger; instead, the anger has been transformed into a feeling, such
as being sad, hurt, scared, frustrated, or the like. Then follow up the expression
of your feelings with the needs of yours that are not being fulfilled.
And now we add to those three pieces of information 
a clear, present request
of what you want from the other person 
in relationship to your feelings and
unmet needs.
In the situation with the prisoner, his fourth step would be to go to the prison
officials and say something like this: “I made a request three weeks ago. I still
haven’t heard from you. I’m feeling scared because I have a need to be able toearn a living when I leave this prison, and I’m afraid that without the training I
was requesting, it will be very hard for me to make a living. So I’d like you to
tell me what is preventing you from responding to my request.”
Notice that for the prisoner to communicate in this way requires a lot of work
on his part. He has to be conscious of what is going on inside him. He may
require some help getting connected to his needs. In this situation, I was there to
help him. But in NVC training, we show people how to do all of this for
themselves.
When you’re stimulated by another person and find yourself starting to get
angry, it is important to manage that anger. If you’re sufficiently trained in
getting in touch with the need behind the judgments, you can take a deep breath
and very rapidly go through the process that I led the prisoner through. So, as
soon as you catch yourself getting angry, take a deep breath, stop, look inside,
and ask yourself, “What am I telling myself that’s making me so angry?” In this
way, you can quickly get in touch with the need that is behind that judgment.
When you’re in touch with the need, you will feel in your body a shift away
from anger to other kinds of feelings. Then, when you’re at that point, you can
say out loud to the other person what you’re observing, feeling, and needing, and
then you can make your requests.
This process takes practice, but with sufficient practice it can be done in a
matter of seconds. Perhaps you’re fortunate enough to have friends around who
can help you get conscious about what’s going on within you. If not, or until you
are sufficiently trained, you can always take a time-out. Simply say to the
person, “Time out. I need to do some work on myself right now, because I’m
afraid that anything I say is going to get in the way of both of us getting our
needs met.” At this point, you can go off by yourself to get in touch with the
needs behind your judgments that are making you angry. Then you can go back
into the situation.
Once you can handle your own anger, it’s very often advantageous to show
some empathic understanding of what is going on in others that led them to
behave as they did. By connecting to this 
before 
expressing yourself, the
advantage can be even greater.
In managing your anger when it comes up this way, a key component is the
ability to both identify the judgment making you angry and quickly transform it
into the need that is behind the judgment. By practicing identifying judgments
and translating them into needs, you can develop your ability to do this quickly
in real situations. An exercise I recommend for practice is to list the kind of
judgments that are likely to go on inside of you when you are angry. Perhaps
think of the most recent time that you were angry and write down what you weretelling yourself that was making you angry.
When you have made an inventory of the kinds of things you tell yourself in
different situations that make you angry, go back over this list and ask yourself,
“What was I needing that was being expressed through that judgment?”The
more time you spend making these translations from judgments into needs, the
more it will help you to quickly follow these procedures for expressing anger in
real-life situations.
PUNISHMENT AND ANGER
I would like to add to this discussion of anger the concept of punishment. The
kind of thinking that leads us to be angry is the kind of thinking that implies that
people deserve to suffer for what they’ve done. In other words, I’m talking about
the moralistic judgments we make of other people that imply wrongness,
irresponsibility, or inappropriateness. At their root, all of these judgments imply
that people shouldn’t have done what they did and that they deserve some form
of condemnation or punishment for doing it.
I believe you’ll see that punishment can never really get needs met in a
constructive way if you ask two questions. The first question is, 
What do we
want others to do differently from what they are now doing? 
If we ask only this
question, punishment may seem to work, because we may be able to get a child
to stop hitting his sister if we punish him for doing it. Notice that I say it 
may
seem to 
work, because often the very act of punishing people for what they do
actually stimulates such antagonism that they continue to do it out of resentment
or anger. They may even continue to do it longer than they would have done had
there not been punishment.
But if I add a second question, I’m confident that you will see that punishment
never works in the sense of getting needs met, at least not for reasons that we
won’t be sorry for later. The second question is, 
What do we want the other
person’s reasons to be for doing what we want them to do?
I think we can all agree that we never want other people to do things simply
because they are afraid of punishment. We don’t want them to do things out of
obligation or duty, or out of guilt or shame, or to buy love. With some
consciousness, I’m confident we all want people to do things only if they can do
them willingly, because they clearly see how those things are going to enrich life
if they do. Any other reason for doing things is likely to create conditions that
make it harder for people in the future to behave in a compassionate way toward
one another.KILLING PEOPLE IS TOO SUPERFICIAL
Part of my objective is to show how the process of Nonviolent Communication
can help you fully express your anger. This is very important to make clear with
many of the groups that I work with. Usually when I’m invited into different
countries, it’s to work with groups that feel they have been very oppressed or
discriminated against, and they want to increase the power that they have to
change the situation. Very often such groups are a bit worried when they hear the
term 
Nonviolent Communication, 
because very often in their history, they have
been exposed to various religions and other trainings that have taught them to
stifle their anger, to calm down and accept whatever is happening. As a
consequence, they are rather worried about anything that tells them that their
anger is bad or is something to be gotten rid of. It’s a great relief for them when
they come to really trust that the process I’m talking about in no way wants them
to stifle anger, to repress it, to force it down. Instead, NVC is a way of fully
expressing the anger.
I’ve often said that, to me, killing people is too superficial. To me, any kind of
killing, blaming, punishing, or hurting other people is a very superficial
expression of anger. We want something much more powerful than killing or
hurting people physically or mentally. That’s too weak. We want something
much more powerful than that to fully express ourselves. The first step in being
able to express our anger fully using Nonviolent Communication is to totally
divorce the other person from any responsibility for our anger. As I’ve said, this
means getting out of our consciousness any kind of thinking that he, she, they
made us angry when they did that. When we think that way, we can be very
dangerous, and we’re not likely to fully express our anger. Instead, we’re likely
to superficially express anger by blaming or punishing the other person.
I have shown prisoners who want to punish others for what they do that
vengeance is a distorted cry for empathy. When we think we need to hurt others,
what we really need is for these other people to see how we have been hurt and
to see how their behavior has contributed to our pain. Most of the prisoners I
have worked with had never received that kind of empathy from people who had
wronged them. So making those people suffer was the best they could think to
do to find relief from their own pain.
I was demonstrating this once to a prisoner who told me he wanted to kill this
man. I said, “I bet I can show you something that would be sweeter than
vengeance.”
The prisoner said, “No way, man. The only thing that’s kept me alive theselast two years in prison is thinking of getting out and getting this guy for what he
did to me. That’s the only thing in the world I want. They’re gonna put me back
in here, and that’s OK. All I want to do is get out and really hurt this guy.”
I said, “I bet I can show you something more delicious than that.”
“No way, man.”
“Would you give me some time?”
(I liked this guy’s sense of humor. He said, “I got plenty of time, man,” and he
was going to be there for a while. That’s why I like working with prisoners:
they’re not running off to appointments.)
Anyway, I said, “What I’d like to show you is another option besides hurting
people. I’d like you to play the role of the other person.”
MARSHALL:
 It’s the first day I’m out of prison. I find you. The first thing I do is I
grab you.
PRISONER, AS HIMSELF:
 That’s a good start
MARSHALL:
 I put you in a chair, and I say, “I’m gonna tell you some things, and I
want you to tell me back what you heard me say. You got that?”
PRISONER, IN OTHER PERSON’S ROLE:
 But I can explain it!
MARSHALL, AS PRISONER:
 Shut up. Did you hear what I said? I want you to tell
me back what you hear me say.
PRISONER, AS OTHER PERSON:
 OK.
MARSHALL, AS PRISONER:
 I took you into my house and treated you as a brother. I
gave you everything for eight months, and then you did what you did to me. I
was so hurt I could hardly stand it.
 [I had heard the prisoner talk about this several times, so it was not hard for
me to play his role.]
PRISONER, AS OTHER PERSON:
 But I can explain it!
MARSHALL, AS PRISONER:
 Shut up. Tell me what you heard.
PRISONER, AS OTHER PERSON:
 After all you had done for me, you felt really hurt.
You would have liked something else besides what happened.
MARSHALL, AS PRISONER:
 And then, do you know what it’s like for the next two
years to be angry day and night so that nothing would satisfy me, except
thoughts of hurting you?
PRISONER, AS OTHER PERSON:
 So it really got your whole life screwed up so that
all you could do was be consumed with anger for two years?
We kept this going for another few minutes, and then this man became very
emotionally moved. He said, “Stop, stop, you’re right. That’s what I need.”The next time I went to that prison, about a month later, a changed guy was
waiting for me as I came through the gate. He was pacing back and forth, and he
said, “Hey Marshall, remember the last time you said that when we really think
that we enjoy hurting people or we want to hurt somebody, the real need is for
understanding for how we’ve suffered?”
I said, “Yeah, I remember that.”
“Would you go over that again today real slow? I’m getting out of here in
three days, and if I don’t get this clear somebody’s gonna get hurt.”
So my prediction is that anybody who enjoys hurting others is being exposed
to a lot of violence themselves—psychological or otherwise. And they need
empathy for the enormous pain that they’re feeling.
WORKSHOP INTERACTIONS
Again, the first step to get into our consciousness is realizing that 
what other
people do is never the cause of how we feel. 
What is the cause of how we feel?
It’s my belief that how we feel is a result of how we interpret the behavior of
others at any given moment. If I ask you to pick me up at six o’clock, and you
pick me up at six thirty, how do I feel? It depends on how I look at it. That you
were thirty minutes later than you said you would be doesn’t make me feel
whatever I feel; it’s how I choose to interpret it. If I choose to put on my judging
ears, then they’re perfect for playing the game of who’s right, who’s wrong,
who’s at fault. If I put these ears on, I will find somebody at fault. So it’s how we
interpret the behavior and what meaning we ascribe to it that causes our feelings.
There’s another connection to feelings, and that’s the other choice. If I put on
my NVC ears, my thinking does not go to who’s at fault. I do not go up into my
head and make a mental analysis of the wrongness on either my part or your
part.
These NVC ears can help us connect to life, to the life that is going on within
ourselves. And to me, this life that is going on within can be most clearly
revealed or grasped by looking at what our needs are. So, ask yourself, “What
are my needs in this situation?” When you are connected to your needs, you may
have strong feelings, but never anger.
Anger is a result of life-alienated thinking, or thinking that is disconnected
from needs. Anger says that you have gone up into your head and have chosen to
analyze the wrongness of the other person, and that you are disconnected from
your needs. But your needs are really the stimulus of what’s going on—they are
the stimulus of the anger you are feeling. You are not conscious of what you
need; your consciousness is focused on what’s wrong with the other person fornot meeting your needs. But if you connect to the other person’s needs, you will
never feel angry. This doesn’t mean that you are 
repressing 
your anger; you
simply won’t feel it.
I’m suggesting that how we feel each moment is a result of which of these
four options we choose: Do we choose to go up into our head and judge the other
person? Do we choose to go up into our head and judge ourselves? Do we
choose to connect empathically with the other person’s needs? Or do we choose
to connect empathically with our needs? It is that choice that determines our
feelings. That’s why Nonviolent Communication requires that a very important
word come after the word 
because
—the word 
I, 
not the word 
you. 
For instance,
“I feel angry because 
I 
____.” This reminds us that what we feel is not because
of what the other person did, but because of the choice we made.
Remember that I see all anger as a result of life-alienated, violence-
provocative thinking. I think all anger is righteous in the sense that to fully
express the anger means putting our entire consciousness on the need that isn’t
getting met. There is a need that isn’t getting met, and that’s righteous; I mean
we have a 
right 
to the feeling in the sense that a need is not getting met. We have
to get that need met, and we require the energy to motivate us to get the need
met. However, I’m also suggesting that anger distorts that energy away from the
direction of fulfilling the needs into punitive action, and, in that sense, it’s a
destructive energy.
FROM PHILOSOPHICAL TO TACTICAL TO PRACTICAL
Let me show you that what I’m talking about is more tactical than philosophical.
To explain what I mean by tactical, let’s go back to that prisoner example. I
wasn’t trying to sell the NVC process to him on philosophical principles, but on
tactical principles.
When he said that the prison officials hadn’t responded to his request, I asked,
“OK, so what made you angry?” And he said, “I told you. They didn’t respond
to my request.” I said, “Stop. Don’t say, ‘I felt angry because 
they 
. . .’ Stop and
become conscious of what you were telling yourself that was making 
you 
so
angry.” But he wasn’t of the philosophical or psychological background; he
wasn’t used to sorting out what was going on inside.
So I said, “Stop. Slow down. Just listen. What’s going on inside?”
And then it came out: “I’m telling myself that they have no respect for human
beings. They’re a bunch of cold, faceless bureaucrats.”
He was going to continue, but I said. “Stop. That’s enough, that’s enough.
That’s why you’re angry.”Then I said to him, “It’s that kind of thinking on your part that is making you
feel very angry. So focus your attention on your needs. What are you needs in
this situation?”
He thought for a while, and he said, “Marshall, I need the training I was
requesting. If I don’t get that training, as sure as I’m sitting here, I’m going to
end up back in this prison when I get out.”
PARTICIPANT U:
 What you’re saying makes sense to me, but I feel like it requires
being so superhuman on my part. It seems like the anger is so instantaneous,
and to actually be able to think through these different steps seems to require
me to be much bigger than I am.
MARSHALL:
 All it requires is to shut up. I don’t see that as being so superheroic.
All it requires is to shut up. Don’t say anything intended to blame the other
person at that moment and don’t take any actions to punish the other person.
Just stop and do nothing except breathe and take these steps. First—and it’s a
big step—just shut up.
PARTICIPANT U:
 But in your earlier example, when you were waiting a half-hour
for a person to pick you up—I mean, they don’t even have to be there, and I’m
already stewing, thinking, you know, “I can’t believe he didn’t pick me up.
Doesn’t he ever remember anything I ask,” and on and on and on.
MARSHALL:
 What I’m saying is there’s something you could be doing during that
time to relieve yourself and that will also increase the likelihood that you’ll
get your needs met. If you do these steps that we’re talking about, you will
have something you can say when he gets there (or she gets there) that is more
likely to get him to be on time the next time. I hope I can make it clear so it
doesn’t seem superhuman. Superhuman is to try to suppress the anger, to try
to push it down. What we’re really aiming for is to keep our attention
connected to life moment by moment. We connect to the life that’s going on in
us, what our needs are at this moment, and focus our attention on the life
that’s going on in other people.
Example of One Woman’s Anger
PARTICIPANT V:
 I faced a situation in which I was in a conversation with someone
and a third person joined the conversation and started addressing the other
person without me. He then made a comment to the effect that they preferred
people in their community to be white. I felt so angry, because I wasn’t getting
my need met to continue to enjoy the conversation I was having.
MARSHALL:
 Now, hold on. I doubt that—I doubt that’s why you got angry.
See, I don’t think we get angry because our needs aren’t getting met. I’ll betyou got angry because you had some thoughts about that other person at that
moment. So I’d like you to be conscious right now about what you were
telling yourself that made you so angry about that person.
 So here’s a person who says, “I’d rather have only white people here,” and
he addresses somebody else rather than you. And you felt angry because why?
Because you told yourself what?
PARTICIPANT V:
 Well, I asked myself, “What’s this person doing, taking over the
conversation that I was already having?”
MARSHALL:
 Think behind the question, “What is this person doing?”What do
you think of a person for doing that?
PARTICIPANT V:
 Well, it’s not a good thought.
MARSHALL:
 But I think it’s in there. I’m not trying to make you have certain
thoughts. I’m just wanting to make you conscious of what I predict is in there.
It probably all happened so fast.
PARTICIPANT V:
 No, right away I was feeling left out.
MARSHALL:
 Well, that’s coming closer. So you interpreted him as leaving you
out. Notice how the image “left out” is not a feeling. It’s an interpretation. It’s
like being abandoned: “I’m feeling abandoned.” “I’m feeling unnoticed.” So
it’s really more an image; you had this image of being left out. And what else
was going on there?
PARTICIPANT V:
 I think it was more than an image, because he was making eye
contact and talking to the other person, and in that exchange they were not
talking to me.
MARSHALL:
 But I think there are twenty different ways we could look at that, of
which leaving you out is only one. There are many other possible ways of
interpreting that. And each one is going to have a big impact on how you feel.
So let’s slow down again. What other thoughts were going on in you that
made you angry at that moment?
PARTICIPANT V:
 Well, I had thoughts associated with somebody using the word
white.
MARSHALL:
 Yeah, I think we’re getting closer now. So, what is your image when
somebody uses the word 
white 
in that way? Especially when he doesn’t look
at you but he looks at others?
PARTICIPANT V:
 What I told myself was when they say 
white, 
they don’t mean
me.
MARSHALL:
 So they’re kind of excluding you.
PARTICIPANT V:
 And, in fact, their behavior and body language and everything
was also giving me that message.
MARSHALL:
 So you believe they were excluding you because of race? Do youhave any thoughts about people who do that?
PARTICIPANT V:
 Yeah, a lot, I mean . . .
MARSHALL:
 That’s what I’m trying to get at. I’m thinking it’s those thoughts that
got stimulated in that moment by that action and that’s what made you angry.
PARTICIPANT V:
 I think so. I agree with what you’re saying. I think it was both
that and the fact that I was actually being excluded.
MARSHALL:
 No, you weren’t actually being excluded. That was your
interpretation that you were being excluded. The fact—and I’m defining this
observation as a fact—is that the person had eye contact with others. See,
that’s the fact. Whether you interpret that as excluding you, whether you
interpret that as racist, whether you interpret that as that person being
frightened of you—these are all interpretations. The fact is, he didn’t look at
you. The fact is, he said something about 
white. 
Those are the facts. But if you
interpret it as excluding, already you are going to be provoking different
feelings in yourself than if you look at it in other ways.
PARTICIPANT U:
 So how could she have handled that? The body language was
excluding her; the conversation was excluding her. I mean, how does she get
to her needs?
MARSHALL:
 If her objective is to fully express her anger, I would suggest that she
become conscious of this thing that we’re struggling with now, that she
become conscious of what she’s telling herself that is making her so angry. So,
in this case, it sounds like she got angry because she immediately interpreted
herself being excluded on the basis of race. This raised all kinds of thoughts in
her about “That isn’t right. You shouldn’t exclude people on the basis of race.”
Was that kind of deeply in there?
PARTICIPANT V:
 I think that came a little later. Yeah, my immediate experience
was that I felt invisible and bewildered and confused. I didn’t understand why
that was happening.
MARSHALL:
 Yeah, so your immediate response in this case wasn’t to judge the
other person. The immediate one was that you were confused, bewildered.
You had a need for some understanding: “Why is this happening?” Then the
thinking started to go off.
PARTICIPANT V:
 That’s when the anger started.
MARSHALL:
 Then the anger started to come because you started to have some
hypotheses about why it was happening. And you wanted to fully express this
anger that came from interpreting: “Hey, wait a minute, I think they are
excluding me on the basis of race, and I don’t like that. I think that’s racist. I
don’t think that’s fair. I don’t think a person should be excluded on that basis.”
Thoughts like that.PARTICIPANT V:
 Yeah.
MARSHALL:
 OK, now that’s the second step. First step, be quiet and identify the
thoughts that are making us angry. Next, get connected to the needs behind
those thoughts. So when you say to yourself, “I don’t think a person should be
excluded on a basis of race. I think that’s unfair. I think that’s racist,” I’m
suggesting all judgments—and 
racist 
would be a good example—are tragic
expressions of unmet needs.
 So what is the need behind the judgment 
racist? 
If I judge somebody as a
racist, what is my need? I would like to be included; I would like there to be
equality. I would like to be given the same respect and consideration as
anybody else.
 To fully express my anger, I open my mouth and say all that, because now
the anger has been transformed into my needs and need-connected feelings.
And yet the need-connected feelings are much scarier for me to express than
the anger.
 “That was a racist thing to do.” That is not hard for me to say at all. I kind
of like saying that. But it’s really scary for me to get down to what’s behind
that feeling, because feelings for me are so deeply related to racism that it’s
scary—but that’s fully expressing the anger.
 So then I might open my mouth and say to the person, “When you came
into the group just now and started to talk to others and not say anything to
me, and then when I heard the comment about 
white, 
I felt really sick to my
stomach and really scared. It just triggered off all kinds of needs on my part to
be treated equally, and I’d like you to tell me how you feel when I tell you
this.”
PARTICIPANT V:
 Actually, I did have something like that conversation with the
person. And some of my frustration and anger that hasn’t gone away is that I
could get only so far with it. I get the feeling that there’s this whole range of
experiences that I’ve had that he wasn’t comprehending.
MARSHALL:
 So if I’m hearing you right, you’re afraid that the other person did
not really connect with and understand all that was going on for you in that
experience?
PARTICIPANT V:
 Right. And then there’s a buildup over years of what I guess I
would call rage about that gap in understanding.
Getting Understanding from Others About Our Feelings and Needs
MARSHALL:
 We want to get some understanding from that person. So fully
expressing the anger means not just that I express these deep feelings behind
it, but that I also help this person to get it. To do this, we have to develop some skills, because if we want
understanding from such a person, the best way to get it is to give this person
the understanding first. See, the more I empathize with what led this person to
behave this way, the greater the likelihood that I’ll be able afterward to get
him to reciprocate and hear all of this depth of experience that I have. It’s
going to be pretty hard for him to hear it. So if I want him to hear it, I need to
first empathize.
 Let me give you an idea of how that goes in a situation like this. For the
past thirty years, I’ve had a lot of experience with racism, because I started off
using NVC with people with strong racial positions. Unfortunately, to this day,
in many of the countries where I work, this is the number one thing that
citizens are concerned with. In many countries in the world, skinheads and
other groups of neofascists are making it very unsafe to move about. This is a
very big issue, so we need to get very good at getting these people to
understand.
 Anyway, early one morning, a cab picked up me and another person at the
airport to take us into town. Over the cabbie’s loudspeaker, we heard, “Pick up
Mr. Fishman at the synagogue on such and such street.” The man sitting next
to me said, “These kikes get up early in the morning so they can screw
everybody out of their money.” I had smoke coming out of my ears, because it
takes far less than that to make a maniac out of me. For many years, my first
reaction would have been to physically hurt this person. So for about twenty
seconds, I had to take deep breaths and give myself some empathy for all the
hurt, fear, rage, and more that was going on in me.
 So I listened to that. I was conscious that my anger wasn’t coming from
him; it was not coming from his statement. My anger—the depth of my fear—
could not be stimulated by such a statement. It went far deeper than that. I
knew it had nothing to do with his statement; it just triggered me to want to
blow up like a volcano.
 So I sat back and just enjoyed this judgment show going on in my head. I
enjoyed the images of taking his head and smashing it.
 And then the first words out of my mouth were, “Are you feeling and
needing?” I wanted to empathize with him. I wanted to hear his pain. Why?
Because I wanted him to get it. I wanted him to see what was going on in me
when he said that. But I’ve learned that if I want that kind of understanding of
what goes on in me, other people will not be able to hear it if they have a
storm going on in them. So I wanted to connect and show a respectful
empathy for the life energy in him that was behind that comment, because my
experience told me that if I did that he would be able to hear me. It wouldn’tbe easy, but he would be able to hear me.
 I said, “It sounds like you had some bad experiences with Jewish people.”
And he looked at me. “Yeah,” he said. “Those people are disgusting. They’ll
do anything for money.”
 “Sounds like you have a lot of distrust, and you need to protect yourself
when you’re with them about financial affairs.”
 “Yes.”
 So he kept going on with it. And I kept hearing his feelings and needs.
 Now, you know, when you put your attention on other people’s feelings and
needs, there’s no conflict. Because what were his feelings and needs? When I
heard that he was scared and wanted to protect himself, I could understand. I
have those needs. I have a need to protect myself. I know what it’s like to be
scared. When my consciousness is on another human being’s feelings and
needs, I see the universality of all of our experiences. I may have a big conflict
with what goes on in someone’s head, with his way of thinking, but I’ve
learned that I enjoy human beings much better when I don’t hear what they
think. I’ve learned—especially with folks who have these kinds of thoughts—
that I can enjoy life much more if I hear what’s going on in their heart and not
get caught up with the stuff that comes out of the head.
 So, after awhile this guy was just really pouring out his sadness and
frustration. Before we knew it, he got off the topic of Jews and moved on to
blacks and some other groups. The guy had a lot of pain about all kinds of
stuff.
 After maybe ten minutes of my just listening, he stopped. He felt
understood. And then I let him know what was going on in me.
 I said, “You know, when you first started to talk, I felt a lot of frustration
and discouragement, because I’ve had quite a different experience with Jews
than you’ve had, and I was really wanting you to have much more the
experience that I have had. Can you tell me what you heard me say?”
 “Well, look, I’m not saying they’re all . . .”
 I said, “Excuse me. Hold it, hold it. Could you tell me what you heard me
say?”
 “What are you talking about?”
 “Let me say again what I’m trying to say. I want you to hear, really hear, the
pain that I felt when I heard your words. It’s really important for me that you
hear that. I said I felt a real sense of sadness, because I’ve had such different
experiences with Jewish people, and I was just wishing that you could share a
different experience than you’ve had. Can you tell me what you’ve heard me
say?” “Well, you’re saying I have no right to say that.”
 I replied, “No, I really don’t want to blame you. Really, I don’t have any
desire to blame you.”
 See, if he was hearing any amount of blame, then he did not get it. If he had
said, “It was a terrible thing for me to say, that was a racist thing for me to say,
I shouldn’t have said it,” that still means he didn’t get it. If he heard that he did
anything wrong, he didn’t get it. I wanted him to hear the pain that happened
in my heart when he said those things. I wanted him to see what needs of mine
were not met when he said that. I did not want to blame him. That’s too easy.
 So we have to work for that—we have to pull the judging person by the
ears. Here’s why: people who judge are not too used to hearing feelings and
needs. They’re used to hearing blame, and then they either agree with it and
hate themselves, which doesn’t stop them from continuing to behave that way,
or they hate you for calling them a racist, which doesn’t stop them from
behaving that way. So that’s what I mean by needing the other person to get it.
You may have to hear their pain for a while first.
 Of course, before I could hear such people’s pain, I had to do a lot of work
for years. A lot of work!
PARTICIPANT V:
 I still feel like I want to be able to protect myself. In other words,
if I had a choice, I just wouldn’t interact with the person, but since he got in
my space, I kind of got involved. And so I’m not sure what you’re trying to
say.
MARSHALL:
 What I’m saying is that if we want to fully express our anger to the
person, then I would go through this. But I’m not saying I 
always 
want to
fully express my anger to such a person. Very often my need might be to go
talk to somebody else about this, to ignore this person. But if I really wanted
to fully express my anger to him, I would give him the empathy that he would
need to be able to hear the depth of feelings and needs that go on in me when
that behavior occurs. That’s the best way I have found to really fully express
my anger, to really let this person know the depth of what’s going on in me.
As you point out, it’s not enough to just pour that out. I need him to get it; I
need him to hear it empathically. That doesn’t mean he has to agree; he
doesn’t even have to change his behavior. I just need him to hear what goes on
in me. So for twenty seconds in the cab, I had a whole lifetime of stuff
floating in, and I sat back and enjoyed it.
Enjoying the Judgment Show in Your Head
Here’s what goes on in me in these situations. Not long ago I was in one country,
and somebody was coming at me pretty hard in a judging kind of way. Thisperson was going blah, blah, blah, and saying some very judgmental things
toward me, and here was my reaction.
[Marshall is silent for a while.]
Then I said, “So, you’re feeling really annoyed, and you would have liked so
and so.”
The person says, “Yes and blah, blah, blah.”
And here’s my reaction.
[Marshall is silent again.]
And then I said, “So it sounds like you were feeling some hurt behind that
because you would have liked blah, blah, blah.”
“Yes, and blah, blah, blah.”
Anyway, this went on several times, and after this stopped a woman said to
me, “Marshall, I’ve never seen a person more compassionate than you are. If
somebody had talked to me the way you were being talked to there, I would’ve
hit them. How did you do it?”
I said, “Let me tell you what was going on in me. You remember that first
statement?”
“Yes.”
“Here’s my first reaction: ‘If you don’t shut up, I’m going to jam your head up
your #@$#. In fact, you’ve got your head so far up there, you need a cellophane
navel to see.’”
And then I said to the woman, “And it got worse from there. I mean, then I
had some really graphic images, and I started to realize that this person’s
statements were very like some ridicule that I had experienced as a child. I
realized that behind that reaction, I had a lot of fear and all of that. I went from
this rage and wanting to shake her to being aware of the humiliation behind it.
So I just stopped and listened. And when I got to that humiliation, that fear of
being humiliated, I felt a release in my body. Then I could do what you heard me
say, when I shifted my attention and put it on her feelings and needs.
“And then you remember the second statement she hit me with?”
And this other person said, “Yes.”
I said, “Here was my first reaction.”
And when I told her my first reaction, this woman’s eyes get very big. She
says, “I never knew you were so violent.” So I have gone from being very
compassionate to very violent in just a couple of exchanges.
Well, they’re both there. There’s an enormous amount of violence in me,
conditioned by cultural factors and other things. So I enjoy that. I just sit back
when I get that angry, and I watch this violent show going on in my head. I hear
all these violent things I’d like to say, and I see these things I’d like to do to thisperson, and then I listen to the pain that’s behind it. And when I get to the pain
behind it, there’s always a release.
Then I can put my attention on the other person’s humanness.
I’m not repressing anything—quite the opposite. I’m enjoying it, this show
going on, this violent show going in my head. I’m just not acting on it, because
to act on it is too superficial. If I jump in and blame others, we’re never going to
get down to the pain behind all this. I’m not going to really be able to fully
express my needs to them and have them get it. We’ll just get into a fight, and I
know how that ends: even when I win, I don’t feel good. So, no, I want to fully
express what’s going on in me.
Take Your Time
PARTICIPANT W:
 You’ve mentioned before that this is a slow process. You
mention that you need time; you take time to give yourself empathy. Well, if
you’re trying to have a conversation and also deal with that time, it seems to
me that you have to tell the other person, “Wait a minute. I’m thinking before
I can answer.” I mean, because you may think more slowly so you can
respond.
MARSHALL:
 Yes. As I mentioned earlier, I carry with me a picture of a my
friend’s son, who was wearing a T-shirt that says 
Take Your Time. 
That picture
of that boy in his shirt is a very powerful symbol to me. It’s probably the most
important part for me in learning this process, learning how to live by it. Take
your time.
 Yes, it feels awkward at times not to behave out of the automatic way I was
trained, but I want to take my time so that I live my life in harmony with my
own values instead of in a robotlike way, automatically carrying out the way I
was programmed by the culture in which I was raised. So, yes, take your time.
It may feel awkward, but for me it’s my life. I’m going to take my time to live
it in a way I want—even if I look silly.
 A friend of mine, Sam Williams, put this process on a three-by-five card—
the kind that the Center for Nonviolent Conversation now sells (we got the
idea from Sam). He would use this as a cheat sheet at work. The boss would
come at him in a judging way, and he would take his time. He would stop and
look down at this card in his hand and remember how to respond.
 And I said, “Sam, don’t people think you’re a little weird looking down at
your hand and taking all of that time?”
 He said, “Actually, it doesn’t take me that much time. But, even so, I don’t
care. I want to really make sure that I’m responding as I want to respond.”
 But at home, he was overt about it. He explained to his children and to hiswife why he had this card, and he said, “I may look strange, and I may take a
lot of time. But this is why I’m doing it.” So when they would have these
arguments at home, he would take his time. And after about a month, he felt
comfortable enough to put the card away.
 Then one night he and his four-year-old son, Scotty, were having a conflict
about the television, and it wasn’t going well. And Scotty said, “Daddy, get the
card.”
ANGER SOUND BITES
How I choose to look at that situation will greatly affect whether I have the
power to change it or make matters worse.
There’s not a thing another person can do that can make me angry.
Any thinking that is in my head that involves the word 
should 
is violence-
provoking.
I don’t think we get angry because our needs aren’t getting met. I think we get
angry because we have judgments about others.
Anger is a natural feeling created by unnatural thinking.
I’m not saying that it is wrong to judge people. What’s important is to be
conscious that it’s that judgment that makes us angry.
Even if you don’t say judgments out loud, your eyes show this kind of thinking.
Use the words “I feel because I . . .” to remind yourself that what you feel is
not because of what the other person did, but because of the choice you made.
To me, the life that’s going on within us can be most clearly grasped by looking
at what our needs are. Ask yourself, “What are my needs in this situation?”
When I am connected to my needs, I have strong feelings but never anger. I see
all anger as a result of life-alienated, violent, provocative thinking.
Killing people is too superficial. To me, any kind of killing, blaming, or hurting
of other people is a very superficial expression of our anger.
Our aim is to keep our attention, moment by moment, connected to life, to the
life that’s going on in us. What are our needs at this moment, and what’s alive
in others?
Sadness is a feeling that mobilizes us to get our needs met. Anger is a feeling
that mobilizes us to blame and punish others.
Fully expressing the anger means not only that I express these deep feelings
behind it but also that I help the other person to get it.
To fully express anger means getting our full consciousness tuned in to the need
that isn’t getting met.
The best way I can get understanding from others is to give them understanding,too. If I want them to hear my needs and feelings, I first need to empathize.
When I give people the empathy they need, I’ve found it isn’t that hard to get
them to hear me.
Anger is a very valuable feeling in NVC. It’s a wake-up call. It tells me that I’m
thinking in ways almost guaranteed not to meet my needs. Why? Because my
energy is not connected to my needs, and I’m not even aware of what my
needs are when I’m angry.
5
 
R
AISING
 C
HILDREN
 C
OMPASSIONATELY
Parenting the Nonviolent Communication Way
 
W
e’ve been teaching Nonviolent Communication to parents for more than
thirty years. I would like to share some of the things that have been helpful to me
and to the parents I’ve worked with, as well as to share with you some insights
I’ve had into the wonderful and challenging occupation of parenting.
I’d first like to call your attention to the danger of the word 
child 
when we
allow it to apply a different quality of respect than we would give to someone
who is not labeled a child. Let me show you what I am referring to.
In parent workshops that I’ve done over the years, I’ve often started by
dividing the group into two. I put one group in one room and the other in a
different room, and I give each group the task of writing down on a large piece
of paper a dialogue between themselves and another person in a conflict
situation. I tell both groups what the conflict is. The only difference is that I tell
one group that the other person is their child, and to the second group I say that
the other person is their neighbor.
Then we get back into a large group, and we look at these different sheets of
paper outlining the dialogue that the groups would have. (I do not allow the
groups to know who the person in the other group’s situation was, so that both
groups think the situation is the same.)
After they’ve had a chance to scan the written dialogues of both groups, I ask
them if they can see a difference in terms of the degree of respect and
compassion. Every time I’ve done this, the group that was working on the
situation with the other person being a child was seen as being less respectful
and compassionate in their communication than the group that saw the other
person as a neighbor. This painfully reveals to the people in these groups how
easy it is to dehumanize someone by the simple process of thinking of him or heras “our child.”
MY OWN AWARENESS
I had an experience one day that really heightened my awareness of the danger
of thinking of people as children. This experience followed a weekend in which I
had worked with two groups: a street gang and a police department. I was
mediating between the two groups. There had been considerable violence
between them, and they had asked that I serve in the role of mediator. After
spending as much time as I did with them, dealing with the violence they had
toward one another, I was exhausted. As I was driving home afterward, I told
myself, “I never want to be in the middle of another conflict for the rest of my
life.”
Of course, when I walked in my back door, my three children were fighting. I
expressed my pain to them in a way that we advocate in Nonviolent
Communication. I expressed how I was feeling, what my needs were, and what
my requests were. I did it this way. I shouted, “When I hear all of this going on
right now, I feel extremely tense! I have a real need for some peace and quiet
after the weekend I’ve been through! So would you all be willing to give me that
time and space?”
My oldest son looked at me and said, “Would you like to talk about it?” Now,
at that moment, I dehumanized him in my thinking. Why? Because I said to
myself, “How cute. Here’s a nine-year-old boy trying to help his father.” But
take a closer look at how I was disregarding his offer because of his age, because
I had him labeled as a child. Fortunately I saw that this was going on in my head,
and maybe I was able to see it more clearly because the work I had been doing
between the street gang and the police showed me the danger of thinking of
people in terms of labels instead of their humanness.
So instead of seeing him as a child and thinking to myself, “How cute,” I saw
a human being who was reaching out to another human being in pain, and I said
out loud, “Yes, I would like to talk about it.” And the three of them followed me
into another room and listened while I opened up my heart to how painful it was
to see that people could come to a point of wanting to hurt one another simply
because they hadn’t been trained to see the other person’s humanness. After
talking about it for forty-five minutes, I felt wonderful, and, as I recall, we
turned the stereo on and danced like fools for a while.
OUR EDUCATION AS PARENTSI’m not suggesting that we don’t use words like 
child 
as a shorthand way of
letting people know that we’re talking about people of a certain age. I’m talking
about when we allow labels like this to keep us from seeing the other person as a
human being, in a way that leads us to dehumanize the other person because of
the things our culture teaches us about “children.” Let me show you an extension
of what I’m talking about, how the label 
child 
can lead us to behave in a way
that’s quite unfortunate.
Having been educated as I was to think about parenting, I thought that it was
the job of a parent to make children behave. You see, once you define yourself as
an authority—a teacher or parent—in the culture that I was educated in, you then
see it as your responsibility to make people that you label a “child” or a
“student” behave in a certain way.
I now see what a self-defeating objective this is, because I have learned that
any time it’s our objective to get another person to behave in a certain way,
people are likely to resist, no matter what it is we’re asking. This seems to be
true whether the other person is two or ninety-two years of age.
This objective of getting what we want from other people—or getting them to
do what we want them to do—threatens the autonomy of people, their right to
choose what they want to do. And whenever people feel that they’re not free to
choose what they want to do, they are likely to resist, even if they see the
purpose in what we are asking and would ordinarily want to do it. So strong is
our need to protect our autonomy that if we see that someone has this single-
mindedness of purpose, if they are acting like they think they know what’s best
for us but are not leaving it to us to make the choice of how we behave, it
stimulates our resistance.
THE LIMITATIONS OF COERCION AND PUNISHMENT
I’ll be forever grateful to my children for educating me about the limitations of
the objective of getting other people to do what you want. They taught me that,
first of all, I couldn’t make them do what I wanted. I couldn’t make them do
anything. I couldn’t make them put a toy back in the toy box. I couldn’t make
them make their beds. I couldn’t make them eat. That was quite a humbling
lesson for me as a parent—to learn about my powerlessness—because
somewhere I had gotten it into my mind that it was the job of a parent to make a
child behave. And here were these young children teaching me this humbling
lesson: that I couldn’t make them do anything. All I could do was make them
wish they had. Whenever I would be foolish enough to do that—that is, to make
them wish they had—they taught me a second lesson about parenting and powerthat has proven very valuable to me over the years. And that lesson was that any
time I would make them wish they had, they would make me wish I hadn’t made
them wish they had. Violence begets violence.
They taught me that any use of coercion on my part would invariably create
resistance on their part, which could lead to an adversarial quality in the
connection between us. I don’t want to have that quality of connection with any
human being, but especially not with my children, those human beings I’m
closest to and taking responsibility for. So my children are the last people with
whom I want to get into these coercive games of which punishment is a part.
This concept of punishment is strongly advocated by most parents. Studies
indicate that about eighty percent of American parents firmly believe in corporal
punishment of children. This is about the same percentage of the population that
believes in capital punishment of criminals. With such a high percentage of the
population believing that punishment is justified and necessary in the education
of children, I’ve had plenty of opportunity over the years to discuss this issue
with parents, and I’m pleased by how people can be helped to see the limitations
of any kind of punishment if they’ll simply ask themselves two questions.
Question number one: 
What do we want the child to do differently? 
If we ask
only that question, it can certainly seem that punishment sometimes works,
because certainly through the threat of punishment or application of punishment,
we can at times influence a child to do what we would like the child to do.
However, when we add a second question, it has been my experience that
parents see that punishment never works. The second question is, 
What do we
want the child’s reasons to be for acting as we would like them to
 
act? 
It’s this
question that helps us to see that punishment not only doesn’t work, but it also
gets in the way of our children doing things for reasons that we would like them
to do things.
Since punishment is so frequently used and justified, parents can only imagine
that the opposite of punishment is a kind of permissiveness in which we do
nothing when children behave in ways that are not in harmony with our values.
Therefore, parents can think only, “If I don’t punish, then I give up my own
values and just allow the child to do whatever she wants.” As I’ll be discussing
below, there are other approaches besides permissiveness or coercive tactics such
as punishment.
While I’m at it, I’d like to suggest that reward is just as coercive as
punishment. In both cases, we are using power 
over 
people, controlling the
environment in a way that tries to force people to behave in ways that we like. In
that respect, reward comes out of the same mode of thinking as punishment.A CERTAIN QUALITY OF CONNECTION
There is another approach besides doing nothing or using coercive tactics. It
requires an awareness of the subtle but important difference between our
objective being to get people to do what we want, which I’m not advocating, and
instead being clear that our objective is to create the quality of connection
necessary for everyone’s needs to be met.
It has been my experience, whether communicating with children or adults,
that when we see the difference between these two objectives— when we are
consciously not trying to get a person to do what we want but trying to create a
quality of mutual concern, of mutual respect, a quality where both parties think
that their needs matter and they are conscious that their needs and the other
person’s wellbeing are interdependent—it is amazing how conflicts that
otherwise seem irresolvable are easily resolved.
The kind of communication that is involved in creating the quality of
connection necessary for everybody’s needs to get met is quite different from the
communication used in coercive forms of resolving differences with children. It
requires a shift away from evaluating children in moralistic terms, such as
right/wrong or good/bad, to a language based on needs. We have to be able to
tell children whether what they’re doing is in harmony with our needs or in
conflict with our needs, but we have to do it in a way that doesn’t stimulate guilt
or shame on the child’s part. So it might require saying to the child, “I’m scared
when I see you hitting your brother, because I have a need for people in the
family to be safe,” instead of, “It’s wrong to hit your brother.” Or it might
require a shift away from saying, “You are lazy for not cleaning up your room,”
to saying, “I feel frustrated when I see that the bed isn’t made, because I have a
real need for support in keeping order in the house.”
This shift in language away from classifying children’s behavior in terms of
right or wrong and good or bad to a language based on needs is not easy for
those of us who were educated by teachers and parents to think in moralistic
judgments. It also requires an ability to be present to our children and to listen to
them with empathy when they are in distress. This is not easy when we have
been trained as parents to want to jump in and give advice or to try to fix things.
When I’m working with parents, we look at situations that are likely to arise
in which a child might say something like, “Nobody likes me.” When children
say something like that, I believe they need an empathic kind of connection. By
that, I mean a respectful understanding in which they feel that we are there and
really hear what they are feeling and needing. Sometimes we can do this silently,just by showing in our eyes that we are with their feelings of sadness and their
need for a different quality of connection with their friends. Or it could involve
our saying out loud something like, “So it sounds like you’re really feeling sad,
because you aren’t having very much fun with your friends.”
But many parents, defining their role as requiring them to make their children
happy all the time, jump in when a child says something like that, and they say
things like, “Well, have you looked at what you’ve been doing that might have
been driving your friends away?” Or they disagree with the child, saying, “Well,
that’s not true. You’ve had friends in the past. I’m sure you’ll get more friends.”
Or they give advice: “Maybe if you’d talk differently to your friends, your
friends would like you more.”
What they don’t realize is that all human beings, when they’re in pain, need
presence and empathy. We may want advice, but we want that after we’ve
received the empathic connection. My own children have taught this to me the
hard way by telling me, “Dad, please withhold all advice unless you receive a
request in writing from us signed by a notary.”
THE LIMITATIONS OF REWARDS
Many people believe that it’s more humane to use reward than punishment. But I
see both of them as power 
over 
others, and Nonviolent Communication is based
on power 
with 
people. In power 
with 
people, we try to have influence not by
how we can make people suffer if they don’t do what we want or how we can
reward them if they do. Instead, it’s a power based on mutual trust and respect,
which makes people open to hearing one another, learning from one another, and
giving to one another willingly out of a desire to contribute to one another’s
wellbeing, rather than out of a fear of punishment or hope for a reward.
We get this kind of power—power 
with 
people—by being able to openly
communicate our feelings and needs without in any way criticizing others. We
do that by offering what we would like from them in a way that is not heard as
demanding or threatening. And as I have said, it also requires really hearing
what other people are trying to communicate, showing an accurate
understanding, rather than quickly jumping in and giving advice or trying to fix
things.
For many parents, the way I’m talking about communicating is so different
that they say, “Well, it just doesn’t seem natural to communicate that way.” At
just the right time while I was developing these ideas, I had read something that
Gandhi had written, in which he said, “Don’t mix up that which is habitual with
that which is natural.” Gandhi said that very often in our culture we’ve beentrained to communicate and act in ways that are quite unnatural and yet have
become habitual because we have been trained for various reasons to do it those
ways. That quote certainly rang true to me in the way that I was trained to
communicate with children. The way I was trained to communicate by judging
rightness and wrongness, goodness and badness, and administering punishment
was widely used and very easily became habitual for me as a parent. But I
wouldn’t say that just because something has become habitual, it is natural.
I learned that it is much more natural for people to connect in a loving,
respectful way and to do things out of joy for one another, rather than using
punishment and reward or blame and guilt as means of coercion. But such a
transformation does require a good deal of consciousness and effort.
TRANSFORMING YOUR HABITUAL COMMUNICATION
I can recall one time when I was transforming myself from a habitually
judgmental way of communicating with my children to the way that I am now
advocating. On the day I’m thinking of, my oldest son and I were having a
conflict, and it was taking me quite a while to communicate it in the way that I
was choosing to, rather than the way that had become habitual. Almost
everything that came into my mind was some coercive statement in the form of a
judgment of him for saying what he had. So I had to stop, take a deep breath, and
think of how to get more in touch with my needs and how to get more in touch
with his needs. This was taking me a while, and he was getting frustrated
because he had a friend waiting for him outside. He said, “Daddy, it’s taking you
so long to talk.” And I said, “Let me tell you what I can say quickly: do it my
way, or I’ll kick your butt.” He said, “Take your time, Dad. Take your time.”
So yes, I would rather take my time and come from an energy that I choose in
communicating with my children, rather than habitually responding in a way that
I have been trained to do, when it’s not really in harmony with my own values.
Sadly, we often get much more reinforcement from those around us for behaving
in a punitive, judgmental way than in a way that is respectful to our children.
I can recall one Thanksgiving dinner when I was doing my best to
communicate with my youngest son in the way that I am advocating, and it was
not easy because he was testing me to the limits. But I was taking my time,
taking deep breaths, trying to understand what his needs were, trying to
understand my own needs so I could express them in a respectful way. Another
member of the family, observing my conversation with my son and having been
trained in a different way of communicating, reached over at one point and
whispered in my ear, “If that was my child, he’d be sorry for what he wassaying.”
I’ve talked to a lot of other parents who have had similar experiences— who,
when they are trying to relate in more human ways with their own children,
instead of getting support, often get criticized. People can often mistake what
I’m talking about for permissiveness or not giving children the direction they
need, instead of understanding that it’s a different quality of direction. It’s a
direction that comes from two parties trusting each other, rather than from one
party forcing his or her authority on the other.
One of the most unfortunate results of making our objective to get our
children to do what we want—rather than having our objective be for all of us to
get what we want—is that eventually our children will be hearing a demand in
whatever we ask. And whenever people hear a demand, it’s hard for them to
keep focus on the value of whatever is being requested, because, as I said earlier,
it threatens their autonomy, and that’s a strong need that all people have. They
want to be able to do something when they choose to do it and not because they
are forced to do it. As soon as a person hears a demand, it’s going to make any
resolution that will get everybody’s needs met much harder to come by.
“CHORE WARS”
For example, my children were given different tasks to do around the house. My
youngest son, Brett, then twelve, was being asked to take the garbage out twice a
week, so that it could be picked up by the garbage-removal people. This
involved a simple act of removing the garbage from underneath the kitchen sink
and taking it out on the front lawn where it could be picked up. This whole
process could be done in five minutes. But it created a battle twice a week when
the garbage was to go out.
How did this battle start? It usually started with my simply mentioning his
name. I would say, “Brett.” But of course, the way I said it, he could pick up that
I was already angry because I was judging him as not doing what he should do.
And even though I was saying his name loud enough so that the neighbors two
blocks down could hear it, what does he do to keep escalating the war? He
pretends that he doesn’t hear me, even though he’s in the next room. Well, what
do I do? I get even angrier, of course, and I escalate further. I say the name even
louder the second time, so that even he can’t pretend that he doesn’t hear me.
And what does he do? He says, “What do you want?” I say, “The garbage isn’t
out.” He says, “You’re very perceptive.” And I say, “Get it out.” And he says, “I
will, later.” And I say, “You said that last time, but you didn’t do it.” And he
says, “That doesn’t mean I won’t do it this time.”Look at all that energy going into the simple act of getting the garbage taken
out. All the tension it created between us, all because at that time I had it in my
mind that it was his job to do it, that he should do it, that it was necessary for
him to learn responsibility. So, in other words, it was being presented to him as a
demand.
People receive requests as demands if they think they will be punished or
blamed if they don’t do the task. When people have that idea, it takes all the joy
out of doing anything.
One night I had a talk with Brett about this at a time when I was starting to get
the point. I was starting to see how my thinking that I knew what was right, that
my job as a parent was to get the children to behave, was destructive. So one
night we had a talk about why the garbage wasn’t going out, and by this time I
was starting to learn how to listen better, to hear the feelings and needs that were
behind his not doing what I asked. And I saw so clearly that he had a need to do
things because he chose to do them and not to do them simply because he was
being forced to do them.
So when I saw this, I said to him, “Brett, how do we get out of this? I know I
really have been making demands in the past in the sense that when you didn’t
do things I wanted you to do, I would make judgments of you as being not a
cooperative member of the family. So how do we get out of this history that we
have, and how do we get to a place where we can do things for each other out of
a different kind of energy?” And he came up with an idea that was very helpful.
He said, “Dad, how about if I’m not sure if it’s a request or a demand, I ask you,
‘Is that a request or a demand?’” I said, “Hey, I like that idea. It would force me
to really stop and look at my thinking and really see whether I am actually
saying, ‘Hey, I’d really like you to do this. It would meet my need, but if your
needs are in conflict, I’d like to hear that, and let’s figure out a way to get
everybody’s needs met.’”
I liked his suggestion to stop and really see what kind of assumptions were
going on in me. And the next day before he went to school, we had three chances
to test this out. Because three times in the morning I asked him to do something,
and each time he looked at me and said, “Dad, is that a request or a demand?”
And each time I looked inside, I saw that it was still a demand. I still had this
thinking in me that he should do it, that it was the only reasonable thing for him
to do. I was prepared to get progressively more coercive if he didn’t do it. So it
was helpful that he called this to my attention. Each time, I stopped, got in touch
with my needs, tried to hear his needs, and I said to him, “OK, thank you. That
helps. It was a demand, and now it’s a request.” And he could sense the
difference in me. And each of those three times, he did it without question.When people hear demands, it looks to them as though our caring and respect
and love are conditional. It looks as though we are only going to care for them as
people when they do what we want.
UNCONDITIONAL LOVE
I remember one time, years ago, when Brett was three years old, I was
wondering whether I was communicating an unconditional quality of love to him
and my other children. He just happened to be the one who came upon me at that
time when I was thinking about this subject. As he came into the living room, I
said, “Brett, why does Dad love you?” He looked at me and immediately said,
“Because I make my potties in the toilet now?” I felt very sad the moment he
said that, because it was so clear. How could he think differently? How
differently I respond to my children when they do what I want than when they
don’t do what I want.
So I said to him, “Well, I do appreciate that, but that’s not why I love you.”
And then he said, “Well, because I don’t throw my food on the floor anymore?”
He was referring to a little disagreement we’d had the night before when he was
throwing some food on the floor. And I said, “Well, here again, I do appreciate it
when you keep your food on your plate. But that’s not why I love you.”
Now he gets very serious and looks at me and says, “Well, why do you love
me, Daddy?” And now I was wondering, why did I get into an abstract
conversation about unconditional love with a three-year-old? How do you
express this to someone his age? And I blurted out, “Well, I just love you
because you’re you.” At the time, the immediate thought I had was, “That’s
pretty trite and vague,” but he got it. He got the message. I just saw it in his face.
He brightened up, and he looked at me and said, “Oh, you just love me
because I’m me, Daddy. You just love me because I’m me.” The next two days it
seemed like every ten minutes he was running over to me and pulling at my side
and looking up and saying, “You just love me because I’m me, Daddy. You just
love me because I’m me.”
To communicate this quality of unconditional love, respect, and acceptance to
other people doesn’t mean that we have to like what they’re doing. It doesn’t
mean we have to be permissive and give up our needs or values. What it requires
is that we show people the same quality of respect when they don’t do what we
ask as when they do. After we have shown that quality of respect through
empathy, through taking the time to understand why they didn’t do what we
would like, we can then pursue how we might influence them to willingly do
what we ask. In some cases, when people are behaving in a serious way thatthreatens our needs or safety and there’s not the time or ability to communicate
about it, we may even use force. But unconditional love requires that no matter
how people behave, they trust that they’ll receive a certain quality of
understanding from us.
PREPARING OUR CHILDREN
Of course, our children are often going to be in situations where they’re not
going to receive this unconditional acceptance and respect and love. They’re
going to be in schools, perhaps, where the teachers are using a form of authority
that’s based on other ways of thinking—namely, that you have to earn respect
and love, that you deserve to be punished or blamed if you don’t behave in a
certain way. So one of our tasks as parents is to show our children a way of
staying human, even when they are being exposed to others who are using a
form of coercion.
One of my happiest days as a parent was when my oldest son went off to a
neighborhood school. He was twelve years old at the time. He had just finished
six years in a school where I’d helped train the teachers, a school based on
principles of Nonviolent Communication, where people were expected to do
things not because of punishment or reward, but because they saw how it was
contributing to their own and other people’s wellbeing, where evaluation was in
terms of needs and requests, not in terms of judgments. So this was going to be
quite a different experience for him after six years in such a school—to go to the
neighborhood school, which I’m sad to say wasn’t functioning in a way that I
would have liked.
Before he went off to this school, I had tried to provide him with some
understanding of why teachers in this school might be communicating and
behaving in a different way. I tried to provide him with some skills for handling
that situation should it occur. When he came home from school the first day, I
was delighted to find out how he had used what I had offered him.
I asked him, “Rick, how was the new school?” And he said, “Oh, it’s OK,
Dad. But boy, some of those teachers.” I could see that he was distressed, and I
said, “What happened?”
He said, “Dad, I wasn’t even halfway in the door—really I was just walking in
—when this man teacher saw me and came running over and screamed at me,
‘My, my, look at the little girl.’” Now, what that teacher was reacting to was the
fact that my son had long hair at the time, down to his shoulders. And this
teacher had a way of thinking, apparently, where he thought he, as the authority,
knew what was right—that there was a right way to wear hair, and that if peopledon’t do things the right way, then you have to shame them or guilt them or
punish them into doing it.
I felt sad to hear that my child would be greeted that way his first moment in
the new school. And I said, “How did you handle it?” And he said, “Dad, I
remembered what you said—that when you’re in a place like that, never give
them the power to make you submit or rebel.” Well, I was delighted that he
would remember that abstract principle at such a time. And I told him I was glad
that he remembered it, and I said, “How did you handle the situation?”
He said, “Dad, I also did what you suggested—that when people are talking to
me that way, to try to hear what they’re feeling and needing and not take it
personally. Just to try to hear their feelings and needs.”
I said, “Wow, am I glad that you thought to do that. What did you hear?”
He said, “Dad, it was pretty obvious. I heard that he was irritated and wanted
me to cut my hair.”
“Oh,” I said. “How did that leave you feeling, to receive his message in that
way?”
And he said, “Dad, I felt really sad for the man. He was bald and seemed to
have a problem about hair.”
THE “CAPTAIN” GAME
I had a very good experience with my children when they were three, four, and
seven years old. I was then writing a book for teachers about how to create
schools in harmony with the principles of Nonviolent Communication, in
harmony with principles of mutual respect between teachers and students— to
create schools that fostered the values of autonomy and interdependence. As part
of the research I was doing in setting up these schools, I wanted to learn more
about what kinds of choices we could trust children to make and to be able to
turn these decisions over to children so that they were better able to develop their
ability to make choices in their lives.
At this time, I thought a good way of learning more about this might be to
play a game with my children that we called “Captain.” Each day, I would
appoint one of the children as captain. And when it was their turn as the captain,
I would turn over many decisions that I would usually make to the captain. But I
wouldn’t give this decision to the children unless I was prepared to live with
however they made their choices. As I said, my purpose in this game was to
learn how children could make choices, how early they could make certain
choices, and which ones might not be easy for them to make.
Here is an example of how this game went and what a good learningexperience it was for me. Once I took the children with me to pick up some dry
cleaning, and as I paid, the woman started to hand me three pieces of candy for
the children. Immediately I saw a good opportunity to turn a decision over to the
captain. As the woman handed me the candy, I said, “Uh, would you please give
the candy to the captain?”
Well, she didn’t know what I was talking about, but the captain did. Three-
year-old Brett walked over, held out his hand, and she placed the candy in his
hand. And then I said, “Captain, would you please choose what to do with this
candy?”
Imagine this rough decision for this three-year-old captain. Here he is, three
pieces of candy in his hand. He has a sister looking at him; he has a brother
looking at him. How does he choose? Well, after a serious consideration, he gave
one piece to his brother and one piece to his sister, and he ate the other himself.
When I first told that story to a group of parents, one of the parents said,
“Well, yes, but that’s because you had taught him that it was right to share.” And
I said to the parent, “Oh, I know that’s not so, because a week before he was in a
very similar situation, and he ate all three pieces of candy. Can you guess what
happened to him the next day? He learned the next day that if we don’t take
other people’s needs into consideration, our own needs can never really be met.
He really got a quick lesson on interdependence. It was thrilling for me to see
how quickly children saw this when they really had choices to make—that we
can never really take care of ourselves without showing equal concern for the
needs of others.”
As I said, it’s not easy for parents to let go of the concept of punishment. It’s
deeply ingrained in many parents that punishment is a necessity. And they can’t
imagine what else can be done when children are behaving in ways that might be
harmful to themselves and other people. They can’t conceive of other options
besides permissiveness, just letting it go, or using some kind of punitive action.
THE USE OF FORCE
I have found it very important to get across to such parents the concept of the
protective use of force and to get them to see the difference between the
protective use of force and the punitive use of force. When might we sometimes
have to use a form of force with our children?
The conditions calling for this type of force would be when there isn’t time to
communicate and children’s behavior might be injurious to themselves or other
people. Or it could be that someone isn’t willing to talk. So if people aren’t
willing to talk, or there isn’t time to talk, and meanwhile they are behaving in away that is in conflict with one of our needs—such as a need to protect others—
we might have to use force. But now we have to see the difference between the
protective and the punitive use of force. One way that these two uses of force
differ is in the thinking of the person who is engaging in the force.
In the punitive use of force, the person using such force has made a moralistic
judgment of others, a judgment that implies some kind of wrongness that is
deserving of punishment. Those others deserve to suffer for what they’ve done.
That’s the whole idea of punishment. It comes out of these ideas that human
beings are basically sinful, evil creatures, and the corrective process is to make
them penitent. We have to get them to see how terrible they are for doing what
they’re doing, and the way we make them penitent is to use some form of
punishment to make them suffer. Sometimes this can be a physical punishment
in the form of spanking, or it could be a psychological punishment in the form of
trying to make them hate themselves through making them feel guilty or
ashamed.
The thinking behind the protective use of force is radically different. There is
no consciousness that the other person is bad or deserving of punishment. Our
consciousness is fully focused on our needs. We are conscious of what need of
ours is in danger, but we are not in any way implying badness or wrongness to
the child.
This kind of thinking is one significant difference between the protective use
of force and the punitive use of force. And this thinking is closely related to a
second difference: the intent. In the punitive use of force, it is our intent to create
pain and suffering for the other person, to make them sorry for what they did. In
the protective use of force, our intent is only to protect. We protect our needs,
and then later we’ll have the communication necessary to educate the person.
But at the moment it may be necessary to use the force to protect.
An example of this would be how when my children were young and we lived
on a busy street, they seemed to be fascinated with what was going on across the
street, but they hadn’t yet learned the dangers of what can happen if you just dart
out in the street. I was certain that if we could talk long enough about this I could
educate them, but in the meantime I was afraid that they could be killed. So here
was a case for the protective use of force—there not being the time to
communicate about this before something serious could happen. So what I said
to them was, “If I see you running in the street, I’m going to put you in the
backyard where I don’t have to worry about you getting hit by a car.” Not long
after I said that, one of them forgot and started to run in the street. I picked him
up, carried him into the yard, and put him there. It was not as a punishment—
there was plenty to do in the yard; we had swings and a slide. I wasn’t trying tomake him suffer. I was only wanting to control the environment to meet my need
for safety.
Now many parents say, “Well, isn’t the child likely to see that as a
punishment?” Well, if it has been intended as a punishment in the past, if the
child has had a lot of experience seeing force as punitive, then yes, that child
could still see it as a punishment. The main thing, though, is that we, the parents,
are conscious of this difference, and that if we use force we’re certain that it is to
protect and not to punish.
One way of remembering the purpose of the protective use of force is to see
the difference between controlling the child and controlling the environment. In
punishment, we’re trying to control children by making them feel bad about
what they’ve done, to create an internal shame, guilt, or fear for what they have
done. In the protective use of force, however, our intent is not to control the
child; it’s to control the environment, to protect our needs until such time as we
can have the quality of communication with the child that’s really necessary. It’s
somewhat like putting screens on our house to protect us from being bitten by
mosquitoes. It’s a protective use of force. We control the environment to prevent
things happening that we don’t want to happen.
SUPPORTIVE COMMUNITIES
The way of parenting that I’m advocating here is quite different from how most
people are parenting. It’s going to be difficult to consider radically different
options in a world where punishment is so prevalent and where you are likely to
be misinterpreted if you don’t use punishment and other coercive forms of
parental behavior. It can really help to be part of a supportive community that
understands the concept of parenting I’m talking about, a community that gives
the support to continue to do this in a world that doesn’t often support it.
I know that I was always much better able to stay with what I’m now talking
about if I was getting a lot of empathy from a supportive community—empathy
for how hard it can be to be a parent at times and for how easy it is to fall into
old patterns. When I had other parents trying to connect with their children as I
was, it was very supportive to be able to talk to them—to hear their frustrations,
to have them hear mine. And I noticed that the more that I was part of such a
community, the better able I was to stay with this process with my children, even
under difficult conditions.
One of the rewarding things that happened—something that was very
encouraging and enriching—was a message I received from my daughter when
she was very small. It was on a Sunday morning, the only time of the week whenI could relax, a very precious time for me. On this particular Sunday morning, a
couple called me and asked if I would be willing to see them in counseling. They
had a crisis in their relationship and wanted me to work with them. I agreed to
do this without really looking inside myself, seeing what my own needs were
and how I was resenting their intrusion on my time to relax. While I had them in
the living room, counseling them, the doorbell rang and the police brought in a
young woman for me to see. I had also been seeing her in counseling, and they
had found her down on the railroad tracks. That was her way of letting me know
she wanted to see me. She was too shy to call up and ask for another
appointment. This was her way—sitting on the railroad tracks—of letting me
know she was in distress. She knew the train schedule better than anyone in
town, so she knew the police would pick her up before the train got her.
The police left, and I had this young woman in the kitchen crying and the
couple in the living room. I was going back and forth trying to lovingly counsel
both. While I was walking from one room to the other looking at my watch,
hoping I would still have time afterward for some time to myself, the three
children upstairs started fighting. So I bounded up the stairs, and I found
something fascinating. I might write this up in a scientific paper some day: the
effect of altitude on maniac behavior. Because you see, downstairs I was a very
loving person, giving love to this couple, giving love to the young woman in the
other room, but one flight of stairs up and I was a maniac.
I said to my children, “What’s the matter with you? Can’t you see that I have
hurting people downstairs? Now get in your rooms!” And each went in their
rooms and each slammed the door just loud enough that I couldn’t prove it was a
slam. With the first slam, I got outraged; with the second slam, I got even more
outraged. But fortunately, with the third slam, I don’t know why, it helped me
see the humor in the situation. How easy it was for me to be loving of these
people downstairs, but how quickly I could get brutal with my own family
upstairs.
I took a deep breath, and I went into my oldest son’s room. I told him I was
sad that I was taking out some feelings on him, feelings that I was afraid I really
had for the people downstairs. He understood; he just said, “It’s OK, Dad.
Nothing big.” I went in my youngest son’s room and got a pretty similar
response from him. When I went in my daughter’s room and told her that I felt
sad at the way I had talked to her, she came over and put her head on my
shoulder and said, “It’s OK, Daddy. Nobody’s perfect.”
What a precious message to hear. Yes, my children appreciate my efforts to
relate to them in a caring way, in a compassionate way, an empathic way. But
how relieving it is that they can understand my humanness and how difficult itcan sometimes be.
So in closing, I offer you that reassuring advice given to me by my daughter:
nobody’s perfect. Remember that anything that’s worth doing is worth doing
poorly. And the job of parenting, of course, is extremely worth doing, but we’re
going to do it poorly at times. If we’re going to be brutal with ourselves when
we’re not perfect parents, our children are going to suffer for that.
I often tell the parents that I’m working with that hell is having children and
thinking there’s such a thing as a good parent. If every time we’re less than
perfect we’re going to blame ourselves and attack ourselves, our children are not
going to benefit from that. So the goal I would suggest is not to be perfect
parents; it’s to become progressively less stupid parents—by learning from each
time that we’re not able to give our children the quality of understanding that
they need, that we’re not able to express ourselves honestly. In my experience,
each of these times usually means that we’re not getting the emotional support
we need as parents in order to give our children what they need.
We can only really give in a loving way to the degree that we are receiving
similar love and understanding. So that’s why I strongly recommend that we
look at how we might create a supportive community for ourselves among our
friends and others who can give us the understanding we need to be present to
our children in a way that will be good for them and good for us.
I hope that something I’ve said here has helped you grow closer to becoming
the parent you would like to be.
6
 
P
RACTICAL
 S
PIRITUALITY
Reflections on the Spiritual Basis of Nonviolent Communication
 
W
henever I speak about my deeply held beliefs—spirituality, concepts of God,
views of love—two themes always emerge: (1) the greatest joy springs from
connecting to life by contributing to our own and others’ well-being, and (2)
spirituality and love are more about what we do than what we feel.
People frequently ask me how I got to that place, how I relate to the religious
beliefs of others, and what my views mean for the practice of NVC. What
follows are excerpts of my unscripted verbal responses to queries from media
interviewers and workshop participants on the subject of spirituality, the concept
of the Divine, the spiritual basis of NVC, and applying NVC values to social
change.
HOW DO WE CONNECT WITH THE DIVINE THROUGH NONVIOLENT
COMMUNICATION?
 
I think it is important that people see that spirituality is at the base of
Nonviolent Communication and that they learn the mechanics of the NVC
process with that in mind. It’s really a spiritual practice that I am trying to
show as a way of life. Even though we don’t make a point of mentioning this,
people get seduced by the practice. Even if they practice NVC as a
mechanical technique, they start to experience things between themselves and
other people that they weren’t able to experience before. So eventually they
come to the spirituality of the process. They begin to see that it’s more than a
communication process and realize it’s really an attempt to manifest our
spirituality. I have tried to integrate spirituality into the practice of NVC in a
way that meets my need not to destroy the beauty of it through abstract
philosophizing. The kind of world I’d like to live in will require some rather significant
social changes, but the changes that I’d like to see happen probably won’t
happen unless the people working toward them are coming out of a different
spirituality than what has led to the predicaments we’re in now. So our training
is designed to help people make sure that the spirituality that’s guiding them is
one of their own choosing and not one they’ve internalized from the culture,
and that they proceed in creating social change out of that spirituality.
WHAT DOES “GOD” MEAN TO YOU?
 
I need a way to think of God that works for me—other words or ways to look
at this beauty, this powerful energy. And so my name for God is 
Beloved
Divine Energy.
 For a while it was just 
Divine Energy.
 But then I was reading
some of the Eastern religions and Eastern poets, and I loved how they had this
personal, loving connection with this energy. And I found that it added to my
life to call it Beloved Divine Energy. To me this Beloved Divine Energy is
life, connection to life.
WHAT IS YOUR FAVORITE WAY OF KNOWING BELOVED DIVINE ENERGY?
 
It is how I connect with human beings. I know Beloved Divine Energy by
connecting with human beings in a certain way. I not only see Divine Energy,
but I also taste Divine Energy, I feel Divine Energy, and I am Divine Energy.
I’m connected with Beloved Divine Energy when I connect with human
beings in this way. Then God is very alive for me.
WHAT RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, TEACHINGS, OR WRITINGS HAVE HAD THE GREATEST
INFLUENCE ON YOU?
 
It’s hard for me to say which of the various religions on the planet have had
the most impact on me. Probably Buddhism as much as any. I like so much of
what I understand the Buddha or the people who quoted the Buddha to be
saying. For example, the Buddha makes it very clear: don’t get addicted to
your strategies, your requests, or your desires. That’s a very important part of
our training: to not mix real human needs with the way we’ve been educated
to get those needs met. So be careful to not get your strategies mixed up with
your needs. We don’t need a new car, for example. Some people may choose a
new car as a strategy for meeting a need for reliability or peace of mind, but
you’ve got to watch out, because society can trick you into thinking it’s the
new car that you really need. This part of our training is very much in
harmony with my understanding of the Buddha. Almost all the religions and mythologies I’ve studied say a very similar
message, one that Joseph Campbell, the mythologist, summarizes in some of
his work: 
don’t do anything that isn’t play.
 And what they mean by play is
willingly contributing to life. So don’t do anything to avoid punishment, don’t
do anything for rewards, don’t do anything out of guilt, shame, and the vicious
concepts of duty and obligation. What you do will be play when you can see
how it enriches life. I get that message from my understanding not only of the
Buddha, but also from what I have learned about Islam, Christianity, and
Judaism. I think it’s a natural language. Do that which contributes to life.
DOESN’T THE INFLUENCE OF RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY PROMOTE PASSIVITY,
OR AN “OPIATE OF THE MASSES” EFFECT?
 
I’m very worried about any spirituality that allows us to just sit comfortably in
the world and say, “But I am helping the world. The energy alone coming
from me is going to create social change.” Rather, I trust a spirituality that
leads people to go forward and transform the world, that doesn’t just sit there
with this beautiful image of radiating energy. I want to see that energy
reflected in people’s actions as they go out and make things happen. It’s
something you do, a practical spirituality.
SO NONVIOLENT COMMUNICATION EVOLVED IN PART FROM
SPIRITUAL ORIGINS?
 
Nonviolent Communication evolved from my attempt to get conscious about
Beloved Divine Energy and how to connect with it. I was dissatisfied with
input from my chosen field of clinical psychology, because it was and is
pathology-based and I didn’t like its language. It didn’t give me a view of the
beauty of human beings. So, after I got my degree, I decided to go more in the
direction of Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow.
 I decided to ask myself the scary questions, “What are we, and what are we
meant to be?” I found that there was very little written about this in
psychology. So I took a crash course in comparative religion, because I saw
that it dealt more with this question. And this word 
love
 kept coming up in
each of them.
 I used to hear the word 
love
 as many people used it—in a religious sense,
like, “You should love everybody.” I used to get really annoyed at the word
love.
 “Oh yeah, I’m supposed to love Hitler?” I didn’t know the words 
New
Age bullshit,
 but I used what was my equivalent then. I tried to understandbetter what love means because I could see it had so much meaning for so
many millions of people in all these religions. What is it, and how do you “do”
this “love”?
 Nonviolent Communication really came out of my attempt to understand
this concept of love and how to manifest it, how to do it. I came to the
conclusion that it was not just something we feel, but it is something we
manifest, something we do, something we have. And what is this
manifestation? It is giving of ourselves in a certain way.
WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY “GIVING OF OURSELVES”?
 
To me, giving of ourselves means an honest expression of what’s alive in us in
this moment. It intrigues me that in every culture people ask upon greeting
each other, “How are you?” In English they say it this way: 
How are you?
 In
Spanish, 
¿Cómo estás?
 French is 
Comment allezvous?
 German is 
Wie Geht es
Dir?
 We say it as a social ritual, but it’s a very important question, because if
we’re to live in peace and harmony, if we’re to enjoy contributing to one
another’s well-being, we need to know what’s alive in one another. It’s such
an important question. What a gift it is to be able to know at any given
moment what is alive in someone.
 To give a gift of one’s self is a manifestation of love. It’s a gift when you
reveal yourself nakedly and honestly, at any given moment, for no other
purpose than to reveal what’s alive in you. Not to blame, criticize, or punish.
Just “Here I am, and here is what I would like.” This is my vulnerability at this
moment. To me, that is a way of manifesting love.
 The other way we give of ourselves is through how we receive another
person’s message. To receive it empathically, connecting with what’s alive in
that person, making no judgment. Just to hear what is alive in the other person
and what that person would like.
 So Nonviolent Communication is just a manifestation of what I understand
love to be. In that way it’s similar to the Judeo-Christian concepts of “Love
your neighbor as yourself ” and “Judge not lest you be judged.”
NONVIOLENT COMMUNICATION CAME OUT OF YOUR DESIRE TO MANIFEST LOVE?
 
I was also helped by empirical research in psychology that defined the
characteristics of healthy relationships and by studying people who were
living manifestations of loving people. Out of these sources, I pulled together
a process that helped me connect with people in what I could understand is a
loving way. And then I saw what happened when I did connect with people in this way.
This beauty, this power connected me with an energy that I choose to call
Beloved Divine Energy. So Nonviolent Communication helps me stay
connected with that beautiful Divine Energy within myself and to connect with
it in others. And certainly when I connect that Divine Energy within myself
with the Divine Energy in others, what happens is the closest thing to knowing
what it is to be connected to God.
 It helps to remember that a key purpose of Nonviolent Communication is to
connect with other people—and thus with Divine Energy—in a way that
enables compassionate giving to take place. It’s giving that comes from the
heart willingly, where we are giving service to ourselves and others not out of
duty or obligation; not out of fear of punishment or hope for a reward; not out
of guilt or shame, but for what I consider is our nature—our nature to enjoy
giving to one another. In Nonviolent Communication we strive to connect with
one another in a way that allows our nature to come forward.
 When I say that I think it’s our nature to enjoy giving, some people may
wonder whether I’m a little bit naive and unaware of all the violence in the
world. How can I think it’s our nature to enjoy compassionate giving with
what’s happening? Unfortunately, I see the violence. I work in places like
Rwanda, Israel, Palestine and Sri Lanka, and I’m well aware of it all. But I
don’t think that’s our nature.
 In every place I work, I ask people the following: “Think of something
you’ve done within the past twenty-four hours that in some way has
contributed to making life more wonderful for somebody.” And when they’ve
recalled something, I then say, “Now, how do you feel when you are aware of
how that act contributed to making life more wonderful for somebody?” And
everybody is smiling. When we are aware of the power we have to enrich life,
it feels good—it feels good to serve life.
 And then I ask people, “Can anybody think of anything that’s more
fulfilling in life than to use our efforts this way?” And I’ve asked that question
all over our planet, and everyone seems in agreement. There’s nothing that is
better, nothing that feels better; nothing is more enjoyable than using our
efforts in the service of life, contributing to one another’s well-being.
HOW DO YOU PREVENT EGO FROM INTERFERING WITH YOUR CONNECTION WITH
GOD?
 
By seeing ego as very closely tied to the way my culture has trained me to
think and trained me to communicate. And how the culture has trained me to
meet my needs in certain ways, to get my needs mixed up with the strategies Imight use to meet my needs. So I try to remain conscious of these three ways
that the culture has programmed me to do things that really aren’t in my best
interest, to function more from ego than from my connection with Divine
Energy. I have tried to learn ways to train myself to become conscious of this
culturally learned thinking, and I’ve incorporated these into Nonviolent
Communication.
THEN YOU BELIEVE THAT THE LANGUAGE OF OUR CULTURE PREVENTS US FROM
KNOWING OUR DIVINE ENERGY MORE INTIMATELY?
 
Oh yes, definitely. I think our language makes it really hard, especially the
language given to us by the cultural training most of us seem to have gone
through and the associations the word 
God
 brings up for many people.
Judgmental, or right/wrong thinking, is one of the hardest things I’ve found to
overcome in teaching Nonviolent Communication over the years. The people
I work with have all gone to schools and churches, and if they like Nonviolent
Communication it’s very easy for them to say it’s the “right way” to
communicate. It’s very easy to think that Nonviolent Communication is the
goal.
 I’ve altered a Buddhist parable that relates to this question. Imagine a
beautiful, whole, and sacred place. And imagine that you could really know
God when you are in that place. But let’s say that there is a river between you
and that place, and you’d like to get to that place but you have to get over this
river to do it. So you get a raft, and this raft is a really handy tool to get you
across the river. Once you’re across the river, you can walk the rest of the
several miles to this beautiful place. But the Buddhist parable ends by saying
that “one is a fool who continues on to the sacred place carrying the raft on
their back.”
 Nonviolent Communication is a tool to get me over my cultural training, so
I can get to the place. NVC is not the place. If we get addicted to the raft,
attached to the raft, it makes it harder to get to the place. People just learning
the process of Nonviolent Communication sometimes forget all about the
place. If they get too locked into the raft, the process becomes mechanical.
 Nonviolent Communication is one of the most powerful tools that I’ve
found for connecting with people in a way that helps us get connected to the
Divine, where what we do toward one another comes out of Divine Energy.
That’s the place I want to get to.
IS THIS THE SPIRITUAL BASIS OF NONVIOLENT COMMUNICATION?
 
The spiritual basis for me is that I’m trying to connect with the Divine Energyin others and connect them with the Divine in me, because I believe that when
we are really connected with that divinity within one another and ourselves,
we can enjoy contributing to one another’s well-being more than anything
else. So for me, if we’re connected with the Divine in others and ourselves,
we are going to enjoy what happens, and that’s the spiritual basis. In this
place, violence is impossible.
IS THIS LACK OF CONNECTION TO DIVINE ENERGY RESPONSIBLE FOR VIOLENCE
IN THE WORLD?
 
I would say it this way: I think we have been given the gift of choice to create
the world of our choosing. And we’ve been given this great and abundant
world for creating a world of joy and nurturing. To me, violence in the world
comes about when we get alienated or disconnected from this Divine Energy.
 How do we get connected when we are educated to be disconnected? I
believe it’s our cultural conditioning and education that disconnects us from
God—especially our education 
about
 God. And I believe that 
violence comes
because of how we were educated, not because of our nature.
 According to
theologian Walter Wink, we have been educated for about eight thousand
years in a way that makes violence enjoyable, that gets us disconnected from
our compassionate nature.
 And why were we educated this way? That’s a long story, and I won’t go
into it here, except to say that it started with myths that began to develop long
ago about human nature—myths that humans were basically evil, selfish, and
that the good life is all about heroic forces crushing evil forces. Wink wrote
about how domination cultures use certain teachings about God to maintain
oppression. That’s why priests and kings have often been closely related. The
kings needed the priests to justify the oppression, to interpret the holy books in
ways that justified punishment, domination, and so forth.
 So we’ve been living under a destructive mythology for a long time, and
that destructive mythology requires a certain language. It requires a language
that dehumanizes people, turns them into objects. We have learned to think in
terms of moralistic judgments of one another. We have words in our
consciousness like 
right, wrong, good, bad, selfish, unselfish, terrorists,
freedom fighters.
 And connected to these is the concept of justice based on
deserve
—that if you do one of these bad things, you deserve to be punished. If
you do the good things, then you deserve to be rewarded.
 Unfortunately, for about eight thousand years we have been subjected to
that consciousness. I think that’s the core of violence on our planet: faulty
education. The process of Nonviolent Communication is an integration ofthought, language, and communication that I think brings us closer to our
nature. It helps us to connect with one another so that we come back to what is
really the fun way to live, which is contributing to one another’s well-being.
HOW DO WE OVERCOME THIS CONDITIONING?
 
I’m often in between people in a lot of pain. I remember working with twenty
Serbians and twenty Croatians. Some of the people there had family members
killed by the other side, and they all had generations of poison pumped into
their heads about the other side. They spent three days expressing their rage
and pain to one another. Fortunately, we were there for seven days.
 One word I haven’t used yet in speaking about the power of NVC is the
word 
inevitability.
 So many times I have seen that no matter what has
happened, if people connect in this certain way, it is inevitable that they will
end up enjoying giving to one another. It is 
inevitable.
 For me, my work is like
watching a magic show. It’s too beautiful for words.
 But sometimes this Divine Energy doesn’t work as fast as I think it should.
I remember sitting there in the middle of all this rage and pain and thinking,
“Divine Energy, if you can heal all this stuff why are you taking so long, why
are you putting these people through this?” And the Energy spoke to me, and
it said, “You just do what you can to connect. Bring your energy in. Connect
and help the other people connect, and let me take care of the rest.” But even
though that was going on in one part of my brain, I knew joy was inevitable if
we could just keep getting connected to our own and one another’s Divine
Energy.
 And it happened. It happened with great beauty. The last day everybody
was talking about joy. And many of them said, “You know, I thought I was
never going to feel joy again after what we’ve been through.” This was the
theme on everybody’s lips. That evening, the twenty Serbians and twenty
Croatians, who seven days earlier had only unimaginable pain in relation to
one another, danced one another’s dances, sang one another’s songs, and
celebrated the joy of life together.
WE GAIN THIS CONNECTION TO EACH OTHER BY KNOWING GOD?
 
I want to stay away from intellectualizing about God. If by “knowing God,”
we mean this intimate connection with Beloved Divine Energy, then we gain
every second as experiencing heaven.
 The heaven I gain from knowing God is this inevitability, to know it is
inevitable—that, no matter what the hell is going on, if we get to this level ofconnection with one another, if we get in touch with one another’s Divine
Energy, it’s inevitable that we will enjoy giving, and we’ll give back to life.
I’ve been through such ugly stuff with people that I don’t get worried about it
anymore. It’s inevitable. If we get that quality of connection, we’ll like where
it gets us.
 It amazes me how effective it is. I could tell you similar examples between
the extremist Israelis, both politically and religiously, and the same on the
Palestinian side, and between the Hutus and the Tutsis, and between Christian
and Muslim tribes in Nigeria. With all of them, it amazes me how easy it is to
bring about this reconciliation and healing.
 Once again, all we have to do is get both sides connected to the other
person’s needs. To me, the needs are the quickest, closest way of getting in
connection with that Divine Energy. Everyone has the same needs. The needs
come because we’re alive.
EXACTLY HOW DO WE GAIN THIS CONNECTION TO DIVINE ENERGY AND TO OTHER
PEOPLE?
 
There are two basic parts to the process. The first is learning how to express
ourselves in a language of life. The other half of the process is how we
respond to other people’s messages. In Nonviolent Communication, we try to
keep our attention focused by answering two critical questions: 
What’s alive
in us?
 and 
What can we do to make life more wonderful?
 The first question, “What’s alive in me; what’s alive in you?” is a question
that all over the planet people ask themselves when they get together: “How
are you?”
 Sadly, even though most people ask the question, very few people really
know how to answer it very well, because we haven’t been educated in a
language of life. We’ve not really been taught to answer the question. We ask
it, yes, but we don’t know how to answer it. Nonviolent Communication, as
we’ll see, suggests how we can let people know what’s alive in us. It shows us
how to connect with what’s alive in other people, even if they don’t have
words for saying it.
HOW DO WE EXPRESS WHAT’S ALIVE IN US?
 
Expressing what’s alive in us requires literacy on three levels. First of all, it
requires being able to answer the question “What’s alive in you?” without
mixing in any evaluation. That’s what I call an 
observation.
 What do people
do that we either like or don’t like? That’s important information to
communicate. To tell people what’s alive in us, we need to tell the otherperson what they’re doing that is supporting life in us 
and
 what they’re doing
that isn’t supporting life in us. But it’s very important to learn how to say that
to people without mixing in any evaluation. So this is the first step in trying to
tell people what’s alive in us: to be able to call their attention—concretely,
specifically—to what the person’s doing that we like or don’t like and not mix
in any evaluation.
 With an observation in mind of what this person does, if we’re to use
Nonviolent Communication, we want to be honest with that person about it.
But it’s an honesty of a different kind from telling people what’s wrong with
them—honesty from the heart, not honesty that implies wrongness. We want
to go inside and tell the person what’s alive in us when this person does this.
And this involves the other two forms of literacy we need: feeling literacy and
need literacy. 
To say clearly what’s alive in us at any given moment, we have
to be clear about what we feel and what we need.
 So let’s start with the
feelings.
 We have 
feelings
 every moment. The problem is that we haven’t learned
how to be conscious of what’s alive in us. Our consciousness has been directed
to make us look outward to what authority thinks we are. There are different
ways we might express our feelings, depending on what culture we grow up
in, but it is important to have a vocabulary of feelings that really does describe
what’s alive in us and that doesn’t include interpretations of other people. We
don’t want to use words like 
misunderstood,
 because that’s not really a
feeling; that’s more how we are analyzing whether the other person has
understood us. If we think somebody has misunderstood us, sometimes we can
be angry, frustrated—it could be many different things. Likewise, we don’t
want to use words like 
manipulated
 or 
criticized.
 They’re not what we call
feelings in our training. Sadly, very few people have much of a feeling
vocabulary, and I see the cost of that very often in my work.
 Is it really an expression of what’s alive in you, your feelings? Make sure
that it’s not a thought diagnosis of others. Go into your heart. How do you feel
when others do what they do?
 
Editor’s note: For complete feelings and needs vocabularies, please see
Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life 
by Marshall B. Rosenberg,
PhD.
DO YOU SUGGEST THAT SIMPLY TELLING PEOPLE HOW WE FEEL IS ALL THAT’S
NEEDED?
 
No, feelings can be used in a destructive way if we try to imply that otherpeople’s behavior is the cause of our feelings. 
The cause of our feelings is our
needs, not other people’s behavior.
 And this is the third component of
expressing what’s alive in us: 
needs.
 Getting connected to what’s alive in us is
getting connected to our own Divine Energy.
 When I was six years old, we used to say this when somebody would call us
a name: “Sticks and stones can break my bones, but names will never hurt
me.” We were aware then that 
it’s not what other people do that can hurt you;
it’s how you take it.
 But we were educated in guilt-inducing ways by
authorities, teachers, and parents, who used guilt to mobilize us to do what
they wanted. They would express feelings this way: “It hurts me when you
don’t clean up your room.” “You make me angry when you hit your brother.”
We’ve been educated by people who tried to make us feel responsible for their
feelings so we would feel guilty. Feelings are important, but we don’t want to
use them in that way. We don’t want to use them in a guilt-inducing manner.
It’s very important that when we do express our feelings, we follow our
feelings with a statement that makes it clear that 
the cause of our feelings is
our needs.
WHAT PREVENTS PEOPLE FROM JUST SAYING WHAT THEY NEED?
 
Just as it’s difficult for many people to develop a literacy of feelings, it’s also
very difficult for them to develop a literacy of needs. Many people, in fact,
have very negative associations with needs. They associate needs with being
needy, dependent, selfish—and again, I think that comes from our history of
educating people to fit well into domination structures so that they are
obedient and submissive to authority. People do not make good slaves when
they’re in touch with their needs. I went to schools for twenty-one years, and I
can’t recall ever being asked what my needs were. And my education didn’t
focus on helping me be more alive, more in touch with myself and others. It
was oriented toward rewarding me for getting right answers as defined by
authorities. Look at the words that you are using to describe your needs.
Needs do not contain any reference to specific people taking specific actions.
Needs are universal. All human beings have the same needs.
 When we can connect at the need level, when we see one another’s
humanness, it’s amazing how conflicts that seem unsolvable become solvable.
I do a lot of work with people in conflict—husbands and wives, parents and
children, tribes of people. Many of these people think they have a conflict that
can’t be resolved. And it’s been amazing to me, over the years that I’ve been
doing conflict resolution and mediation work, what happens when you can getpeople over their diagnoses of one another, get them connected at the need
level to what’s going on in one another—how conflicts that appear impossible
to resolve seem like they almost resolve themselves.
SO, WHAT’S NEXT AFTER FEELINGS AND NEEDS?
 
We have expressed the three pieces of information that are necessary to
answer the question “What’s alive in us?” We’ve expressed what we’re
observing, what we’re feeling, and the needs of ours that are connected to our
feelings.
 This brings us to the 
second question,
 which is related to the first: “What
can we do to make life more wonderful?” What can you do to make life more
wonderful for me? What can I do to make life more wonderful for you? That’s
the other half of connecting with the Divine Energy in us: how to make
empathic connection with what’s alive in the other person in order to make life
more wonderful for the other person.
 Let me tell you what I mean by empathic connection. Empathy, of course, is
a special kind of understanding. It’s not an understanding of the head, where
we just mentally understand what another person says. It’s something far
deeper and more precious than that. Empathic connection is an understanding
of the heart, where we see the beauty in the other person, the Divine Energy in
the other person, the life that’s alive in that person. We connect with it. We
don’t mentally understand it; we connect with it.
 It doesn’t mean we have to feel the same feelings as the other person. That’s
sympathy—when we feel sad, maybe because another person is upset. It
doesn’t mean that we have to have the same feelings; it means that we are 
with
the other person.
 This quality of understanding requires one of the most precious gifts one
human being can give to another: our presence in the moment. If we’re
mentally trying to understand other people, then we’re not present with them
in this moment. We’re sitting there analyzing them, but we’re not with them.
So empathic connection involves 
connecting with what is alive in the other
person at this moment.
WHAT KEEPS US FROM CONNECTING TO THE LIFE IN ONE ANOTHER AS YOU
SUGGEST?
 
We have been educated to think that there is something wrong with us. I want
to suggest that you should never, never, never hear what other people think
about you. I predict you’ll live longer, and you’ll enjoy life more if you never
hear what people think about you. Never take it personally. Therecommendation I have is to learn to connect empathically with any message
coming at us from other people. And Nonviolent Communication shows us a
way of doing that. It shows us a way of seeing the beauty in the other person
in any given moment, regardless of their behavior or their language. It
requires connecting with the other person’s feelings and needs at this moment,
with what’s alive in them. And when we do that, we’re going to hear the other
person singing a very beautiful song.
 I was working with some twelve year olds in a school in the state of
Washington, showing them how to make empathic connections with people.
And they wanted me to show them how they could deal with parents and
teachers. They were afraid of what they would get back if they opened up and
revealed what was alive in them. One of the students said, “Marshall, I was
honest with one of my teachers. I said I didn’t understand, and I asked her to
explain it again. And the teacher said, ‘Don’t you listen? I’ve explained it
twice already.’”
 Another young man said, “I asked my dad yesterday for something. I tried
to express my needs to him, and he said, ‘You’re the most selfish child in the
family.’”
 They were very eager to have me show them how to empathically connect
with the people in their lives who use language like that, because they only
knew how to take it personally, to think that there was something wrong with
them. I showed the students that if you learn how to connect empathically with
other people, you will hear that they are always singing a beautiful song
expressing their needs. That’s what you will hear behind every message
coming at you from another human being if you connect to the Divine Energy
in that person at that moment.
CAN YOU GIVE AN EXAMPLE OF HOW TO MAKE AN EMPATHIC CONNECTION WITH
SOMEONE?
 
You start by telling them what they’ve done, how you feel, what needs of
yours aren’t getting met. Now, what can be done to make life more
wonderful? This takes the form of a clear request. We need to request what we
would like them to do to make life more wonderful for us. We’ve told them
the pain we feel in relationship to what their behavior is, what needs of ours
aren’t getting met. Now we’re going to say what we would like them to do to
make life more wonderful for us.
 Nonviolent Communication suggests that we make our request using
positive action language. Let me explain what I mean: 
positive
 in the sense of
what you want them to do in contrast to what you don’t want or what you wantthem to stop doing. We get to a different place with people when we are clear
about what we want, rather than just telling them what we don’t want.
 A good example of that was a teacher recently in a workshop who said,
“Oh, Marshall, you’ve just helped me understand what happened to me
yesterday.”
 I said, “What was that?”
 She said, “There was this boy tapping on his book while I was talking to the
class. And I said, ‘Would you please stop tapping on your book?’ So he started
to tap on his desk.”
 You see, telling people what we don’t want is far different from telling them
what we do want. When we try to get somebody to stop something, it makes
punishment look like an effective strategy. But if we ask ourselves two
questions, we would never use punishment again. We would never use it with
children; we would create a judicial system, a correctional system, that does
not punish criminals for what they’ve done; and we wouldn’t try to punish
other nations for what they’re doing to us. Punishment is a losing game.
 As I have mentioned before, we would see that if only we asked these two
questions. Question number one:What do we want the other person to do? See,
it’s not what we don’t want. 
What do we want the person to do?
 Again, if we ask only that question, it can still make punishment seem like
it works sometimes, because we can probably recall times when we’ve used
punishment and were successful at getting somebody to do what we wanted.
But, if we add a second question, we see that punishment never works. And
what is the second question? 
What do we want their reasons to be for doing
what we want them to do?
 The purpose of Nonviolent Communication is to create connections so
people do things for one another out of compassion, out of connection to
Divine Energy, to serve life—not out of fear of punishment, not out of hope
for rewards, but because of the natural joy we feel in contributing to one
another’s well-being. So when we make our request, we want to do it in the
positive—what we 
do
 want.
HOW DO YOU EXPRESS YOUR NEEDS AS REQUESTS WITHOUT SOUNDING LIKE
YOU’RE DEMANDING SOMETHING?
 
We do want to make clear, assertive requests, but we want other people to
know that these are requests and not demands. Now, what’s the difference?
First, you can’t tell the difference by how nicely it is asked. So if we do say to
someone living with us, “I would like you to hang up your clothes when
you’re finished with them,” is that a request or a demand? We don’t know yet.You can never tell whether something is a request or a demand by how nicely
it is asked or how clear it is. What determines the difference between a
request and a demand is how we treat people when they don’t do as we’ve
asked. That’s what tells people whether we make requests or demands.
 Now, what happens when people hear demands? Well, it’s pretty obvious
with some people when they’ve heard your request as a demand. One time I
asked my youngest son, “Would you please hang your coat up in the closet?”
And he said, “Who was your slave before I was born?” OK, well, it’s easy to
be around such a person, because if they hear your request as a demand, you
know it right away. But other people, when they hear a request as a demand,
respond quite differently. They’ll say, “OK,” but then they don’t do it. Or the
worst case is when the person hears the demand, they say, “OK,” and they do
it. But they do it because they heard a demand. They were afraid of what
would happen to them if they didn’t. Anytime somebody does what we ask out
of guilt, shame, duty, obligation, fear of punishment, anything that people do
for us out of that energy, we’re going to pay for it. We want people to do for us
only when they’re connected to that kind of Divine Energy that exists in all of
us. Divine Energy is manifest to me by the joy we feel in giving to one
another. We’re not doing it to avoid punishment, guilt, and all of those things.
WHAT ABOUT DISCIPLINE? WHAT YOU’RE SUGGESTING SOUNDS LIKE JUST BEING
PERMISSIVE.
 
Some people cannot believe that you can have order in the house and the
government unless you force people to do things, unless you make demands.
For example, one mother I was working with said, “But, Marshall, that’s all
very well and good, to hope that people are going to respond out of Divine
Energy, but what about a child? I mean, a child has to first learn what they
have to
 do, what they 
should
 do.” This mother was using two of the words, or
concepts, that I think are the most destructive concepts on the planet today:
have to
 and 
should.
 She didn’t trust that there’s Divine Energy in children, as
well as in adults, so that they can do things not because they fear they’re
going to be punished, but because they see the joy that comes from
contributing to other people’s well-being.
 I said to the mother, “I hope today I can show you other ways of presenting
things to your children so that it’s more of a request. They see your needs.
They don’t do it because they think they have to. They see the choice, and
they respond out of this Divine Energy within themselves.”
 She says, “I do all kinds of things every day that I hate to do, but there are
just some things you 
have to
 do.” I said, “Could you give me an example?”
 She said, “OK. Here’s one. When I leave here this evening, I have to go
home and cook. I hate to cook. I hate it with a passion, but it’s just one of
those things you have to do. I’ve done it every day for twenty years. I hate it,
but you have to do certain things.”
 See, she wasn’t cooking out of Divine Energy. She was doing it out of this
other kind of consciousness. So I said to her, “Well, I’m hoping I can show
you today a way of thinking and communicating that will help you get back in
touch with your Divine Energy and make sure that you only come out of that.
And you can then present things to others so that they can come out of that
energy.”
 She was a rapid learner. She went home that very night and announced to
her family that she no longer wanted to cook. And I got some feedback from
her family. About three weeks later, who shows up at a training but her two
older sons. They came up before the training and said to me, “We want to tell
you how much change has occurred in our family since our mother came to
your workshop.”
 I said, “Oh, yeah. You know, I’ve been very curious. She told me all the
changes she’s been making in her life, and I’m always wondering how that
affects other family members. So I’m glad you guys showed up tonight. What
was it like that first night when she came home and said she no longer wanted
to cook?”
 The oldest son said to me, “Marshall, I said to myself, ‘Thank God. Now
maybe she won’t complain after every meal.’”
HOW CAN I TELL WHEN I’M CONNECTING TO WHAT’S ALIVE IN SOMEONE ELSE?
 
When we do things that don’t come out of this Divine Energy in each of us,
this Divine Energy that makes compassionate giving natural—when we come
out of any culturally learned pattern of doing things because we should, have
to, must, out of guilt, out of shame, duty, obligation, or to get rewards—that is
when 
everybody
 pays for it. Nonviolent Communication wants us to be clear,
to not respond unless our response is coming out of this Divine Energy. And
you’ll know it is when you are willing to do what is requested. Even if it’s
hard work, it will be joyful if your only motive is to make life more
wonderful.
 When we put this all together, it looks like this: We may start a dialogue
with other people by telling them what’s alive in us and what we would like
them to do to make life more wonderful for us. Then no matter how theyrespond, we try to connect with what’s alive in them and what would make life
more wonderful for them. We keep this flow of communication going until we
find strategies to meet everybody’s needs, and we want to always be sure that
whatever strategies people agree to, they’re agreeing freely, out of a willing
desire to contribute to the well-being of one another.
CAN YOU GIVE ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF HOW YOU’VE ACTUALLY USED THIS
PROCESS TO CONNECT WITH OTHERS?
 
I was working in a refugee camp in a country not very pleased with the United
States. There were about a hundred and seventy people assembled, and when
my interpreter announced that I was an American citizen, one of the people
jumped up and screamed at me, “Murderer.” I was glad I knew Nonviolent
Communication that day. It enabled me to see the beauty behind that person’s
message, what was alive and human in him. We do that in Nonviolent
Communication by hearing the feelings and needs behind any message.
 So I said to this gentleman, “Are you feeling angry because your need for
support isn’t getting met by my country?” Now, that required me to try to
sense what he was feeling and needing. I could have been wrong. But even if
we are wrong, if we are sincerely trying to connect with the Divine Energy in
other human beings—their feelings, their needs at that moment—that shows
them that no matter how they communicate with us, we care about what’s
alive in them. And when a person trusts that, we’re well on our way to making
a connection in which everybody’s needs can get met. But it didn’t happen
right away, because this gentleman was in a lot of pain.
 However, it happened that I guessed right, because when I said, “Are you
angry because your need for support isn’t being met by my country?” he said,
“You’re darn right.” And he added to that, “We don’t have sewage systems.
We don’t have housing. Why are you sending your weapons?”
 So I said, “So, sir, if I’m hearing you again, you’re saying that it’s very
painful when you need things like sewage systems and you need things like
housing, and when weapons are sent instead; it’s very painful.”
 He said, “Of course. Do you know what it’s like to live under these
conditions for twenty-eight years?”
 “So, sir, you’re saying that it’s very painful, and you need some
understanding for the conditions that you’re living under.” An hour later, the
gentleman invited me to a Ramadan dinner at his house.
 This is what happens when we can connect with what’s alive in us, the
humanness in one another, the feelings and needs behind any message. This
doesn’t mean we always have to say it out loud. Sometimes it’s pretty obviouswhat people are feeling and needing; we don’t have to say it. They’ll feel it
from our eyes whether we are really trying to connect with them.
 Notice this does not require that we agree with everyone. It doesn’t mean
we have to like what they’re saying. It means that we give them this precious
gift of our presence, to be present at this moment to what’s alive in them and
that we are interested in that, sincerely interested—not as a psychological
technique, but because we want to connect with the Divine Energy in them at
this moment.
THE PROCESS OF CONNECTING TO THE DIVINE ENERGY IN OTHERS WITH NVC
SEEMS CLEAR ENOUGH ON PAPER, BUT ISN’T IT HARD TO ACTUALLY LIVE BY?
 
Just about everybody that studies Nonviolent Communication says two things
about it. First, they say how easy it is—I mean, how simple. Just the two
questions, and all we have to do is keep our communication, our focus of
attention, our consciousness on what’s alive in us and on what would make
life more wonderful. How simple. The second thing they say about it is how
difficult it is. Now, how can something be so simple and so difficult at the
same time?
 It’s difficult because we haven’t been taught to think about what’s alive in
us. We have been educated to fit under structures in which a few people
dominate many. We have been taught to pay the most attention to what people
—especially the authorities—think of us. We know that if they judge us as
bad, wrong, incompetent, stupid, lazy, selfish, we’re going to get punished.
And if they label us as good or bad little boys and girls, good or bad
employees, then we will be rewarded or punished. So we haven’t been
educated to think in terms of what’s alive in us and what would make life
more wonderful.
 Nonviolent Communication suggests that we let people know what’s alive
in us in relationship to what they’re doing. We want to be honest in Nonviolent
Communication, but we want to be honest without using any words that imply
enemy images, wrongness, criticism, insults, and psychological diagnosis.
 Many people believe that you just can’t do this with some people. They
believe that some people are so damaged that no matter what communication
you use, you’re not going to arrive at this point. That has not been my
experience. It just might take some time. Like when I’m working in one of the
various prisons throughout the world. I’m not saying that this connection can
happen right away; it may take quite awhile for people being punished for a
crime to really trust that I’m sincerely interested in what’s alive in them.
Sometimes it’s not easy to stay with that, because my own culturalconditioning didn’t allow me to be fluent at this earlier in my life; so learning
this can be a real challenge.
HOW DO YOU GET ENEMIES TO RECOGNIZE THE DIVINE IN EACH OTHER?
 
When you get people connected at the level of Divine Energy, it’s hard to
maintain those “enemy” images. Nonviolent Communication, in its purity, is
the most powerful, quickest way I’ve found to get people to go from life-
alienated ways of thinking, where they want to hurt each other, to enjoying
giving to each other.
 When I have had a couple of people facing each other, Hutu and Tutsi, and
their families have been killed by each other, it’s amazing that in two or three
hours we can get them nurturing each other. It’s inevitable—
inevitable.
 That’s
why I use this approach.
 Given the amount of suffering that has gone on, it amazes me how simple it
is and how quickly it can happen. Nonviolent Communication really quickly
heals people who have experienced a lot of pain. This motivates me to want to
make it happen even more quickly, because the way we’re doing it now, with
just a few people at a time, still takes awhile.
 How do we get this done more quickly with the other eight hundred
thousand Hutus and Tutsis who didn’t come to our training, and with the rest
of the planet? I would like to explore what would happen if we could make
movies or television shows of this process, because I’ve seen that when two
people go through the process with other people watching, vicarious learning,
healing, and reconciliations happen. I would like to explore ways to use the
media to get masses of people to go quickly through this process together.
HOW BASIC IS OUR NEED TO GIVE TO ONE ANOTHER?
 
I think the need to enrich life is one of the most basic and powerful needs we
all have. Another way to say this is that we need to act from the Divine
Energy within us. And I think that when we 
are
 that Divine Energy, there is
nothing we like more—nothing in which we find more joy—than enriching
life, than using our immense power to enrich life.
 But whenever we are trying to meet this need of ours to live this Divine
Energy, trying to contribute to life, there is also another need and a request that
goes with it. We have a need for information, and so we make a request for
feedback from the person whose life we are trying to enrich. We want to know,
“Is my intention being fulfilled by my action? Was my attempt to contribute
successful?” In our culture, that request gets distorted into our thinking that we have a
need
 for the other person to love us for what we’ve done, to appreciate what
we’ve done, to approve of us for what we’ve done. And that distorts and
screws up the beauty of the whole process. It wasn’t the other person’s
approval that we needed. Our very intent was to use our energy to enrich life.
But we need the feedback. How do I know my effort was successful unless I
get feedback?
 And I can use this feedback to help me know if I am coming out of Divine
Energy. I know that I am coming out of Divine Energy when I am able to
value a criticism as much as a thank you.
HAVE YOU ENCOUNTERED ANY CULTURAL OR LANGUAGE BARRIERS TO THIS
PROCESS?
 
It amazes me how few and how little they are. When I first started to teach
this process in another language, I really doubted that it could be done. I
remember the first time I was in Europe; I was going to go first to Munich and
then to Geneva. My colleague and I both doubted that we could get this
through in another language. She was going to do it in French, and I would be
there for her to ask me questions if something came up. I was going to at least
try to see if we could go through translators. But it worked so well without
any problems, and I find the same thing everywhere.
 So I just don’t worry about it. I’ll do it in English, and you translate it, and
it works very well. I can’t think of any culture in which we’ve had any
problem other than little things, but not with the essence of it. Not only have
we had no problems, but also repeatedly, after trainings all over the world, a
variety of people tell me that this is essentially what their religion says. It’s old
stuff; they know this stuff, and they’re grateful for this manifestation. But it’s
nothing new.
DO YOU BELIEVE A SPIRITUAL PRACTICE IS IMPORTANT FOR PRACTICING
NONVIOLENCE?
 
I recommend in all workshops that people take time to ask themselves this
question, “How do I choose to connect with other human beings?” and to be
as conscious as they can about that—to make sure it’s their choice and not the
way they’ve been programmed to choose. Really, what is the way you would
choose to connect with other human beings?
 Gratitude also plays a big role for me. If I am conscious of a human act that
I want to express gratitude for, conscious of how I feel when the act occurs—
whether it’s my act or someone else’s, and regardless of what needs of mine itfulfills—then expressing gratitude fills me with consciousness of the power
that we human beings have to enrich lives. It makes me aware that we are
Divine Energy, that we have such power to make life wonderful, and that there
is nothing we like better than to do just that.
 To me, that is powerful evidence of our Divine Energy, that we have this
power to make life so wonderful, and that there is nothing we like more.
That’s why part of my spiritual practice is to be conscious of gratitude and
expressing gratitude.
HAVE YOU BEEN INFLUENCED BY PAST MOVEMENTS THAT HAVE ATTEMPTED TO
MEDIATE BETWEEN SPIRITUALITY AND SOCIAL CHANGE, LIKE THOSE OF GANDHI
OR MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.?
 
Well, I certainly have been affected by them, because I’ve studied people
historically who were getting things done in a way that I value, and they
certainly are two people who were doing that. The kind of spirituality I value
is one in which you get great joy out of contributing to life, not just sitting and
meditating, although meditation is certainly valuable. But, from the
meditation, from the resulting consciousness, I would like to see people in
action, creating the world they want to live in.
R
ECOMMENDED
 R
EADING
 
Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life, 2nd Ed. 
by Marshall B.
Rosenberg, PhD
Speak Peace in a World of Conflict 
by Marshall B. Rosenberg, PhD
The Open and Closed Mind: Investigations into the Nature of Belief Systems and
Personality Systems 
by Milton Rokeach
 
The Powers That Be:Theology for a
New Millennium 
by Walter Wink
 
Spirit Matters 
by Michael Lerner
 
A
Spirituality of Resistance: Finding a Peaceful Heart and Protecting the Earth
by Roger S. GottliebA
BOUT THE
 C
ENTER FOR
N
ONVIOLENT
 C
OMMUNICATION
 
T
he Center for Nonviolent Communication (CNVC) is an international
nonprofit peacemaking organization with the vision of a world in which
everyone’s needs are met peacefully. CNVC is devoted to supporting the spread
of Nonviolent Communication (NVC) around the world.
Founded in 1984 by Dr. Marshall B. Rosenberg, CNVC has been contributing
to a vast social transformation in thinking, speaking, and acting—showing
people how to connect in ways that inspire compassionate results. NVC is now
being taught around the globe in communities, schools, prisons, mediation
centers, churches, businesses, professional conferences, and more. More than
two hundred certified trainers and hundreds more teach NVC to approximately
250,000 people each year in thirty-five countries.
CNVC believes that NVC training is a crucial step in continuing to build a
compassionate, peaceful society. Your tax-deductible donation will help CNVC
continue to provide training in some of the most impoverished, violent corners
of the world. It will also support the development and continuation of organized
projects aimed at bringing NVC training to high-need geographic regions and
populations.
To make a tax-deductible donation or to learn more about the valuable
resources described below, visit the CNVC website at 
cnvc.org:
 • 
Training and Certification: 
Find local, national, and international training
opportunities; access trainer certification information; and connect to local
NVC communities, trainers, and more.
 • 
CNVC Bookstore: 
Find mail-or phone-order information for a complete
selection of NVC books, booklets, and audio and video materials.
 • 
CNVC Projects: 
Seven regional and theme-based projects provide focus
and leadership for teaching NVC in a particular application or geographicregion.
 • 
E-Groups and LISTSERVS™: 
Join one of several moderated, topic-based
NVC e-groups and LISTSERVS developed to support individual learning
and the continued growth of NVC worldwide.
For more information, please contact CNVC at 5600-A San Francisco Road NE,
Albuquerque, NM 87109; phone: 505-244-4041; fax: 505-247-0414; email:
[REDACTED]
; website: 
cnvc.org
AN INVITATION
What’s missing from this transcription is the experience of sharing time and
space with Marshall Rosenberg or one of the CNVC certified trainers. The
power, warmth, and poignancy of the NVC message are amplified by being at a
training session in person. The interplay with a live audience adds a dimension
to the learning process that is hard to match on paper. If you’d like to see
Marshall or another CNVC trainer in person, please visit 
cnvc.org
 for a schedule
of NVC trainings and speaking engagements, as well as a listing of NVC trainers
and support people around the world.
For a listing of NVC materials—audios, CDs, books, and more—please visit
cnvc.org
. For additional NVC books and publication information, please visit
NonviolentCommunication.com
.A
BOUT THE
 A
UTHOR
 
M
arshall B. Rosenberg, PhD, is the founder and director of educational
services for the Center for Nonviolent Communication (CNVC), an international
peacemaking organization. He is the author of 
Speak Peace in a World of
Conflict 
and the best-selling 
Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life.
Marshall is the proud recipient of the 2006 Global Village Foundation’s Bridge
of Peace Award and the Association of Unity Churches International 2006 Light
of God Expressing in Society Award.
Growing up in a turbulent Detroit neighborhood, Marshall developed a keen
interest in new forms of communication that would provide peaceful alternatives
to the violence he encountered. His interest led to a doctorate in clinical
psychology from the University of Wisconsin in 1961, where he studied under
Carl Rogers. His subsequent life experience and study of comparative religion
motivated him to develop the NVC process.
Marshall first used the NVC process in federally funded school integration
projects during the 1960s to provide mediation and communication skills
training. In 1984 he founded CNVC, which is now affiliated with more than two
hundred certified NVC trainers in thirty-five countries around the globe.
AWARDS
2006:
Bridge of Peace Award from the Global Village Foundation
2006:
Light of God Expressing in Society Award from the Association of Unity
Churches International
2004:
Religious Science International Golden Works Award
2004:
International Peace Prayer Day Man of Peace Award by the
Healthy, Happy Holy Organization (3HO)
2002:
Princess Anne of England and Chief of Police Restorative Justice
Appreciation Award
2000:
International Listening Association Listener of the Year Award
With guitar and puppets in hand, a history of traveling to some of the mostviolent corners of the world, and a spiritual energy that fills a room, Marshall
shows us how to create a more peaceful and satisfying world. Marshall is
currently based in Albuquerque, New Mexico.A
BOUT
 S
OUNDS
 T
RUE
 
S
ounds True is a multimedia publisher whose mission is to inspire and support
personal transformation and spiritual awakening. Founded in 1985 and located in
Boulder, Colorado, we work with many of the leading spiritual teachers,
thinkers, healers, and visionary artists of our time. We strive with every title to
preserve the essential “living wisdom” of the author or artist. It is our goal to
create products that not only provide information to a reader or listener but that
also embody the quality of a wisdom transmission.
For those seeking genuine transformation, Sounds True is your trusted partner.
At SoundsTrue.com you will find a wealth of free resources to support your
journey, including exclusive weekly audio interviews, free downloads,
interactive learning tools, and other special savings on all our titles.
For two free downloads, please visit
http://www.soundstrue.com/bonus/free_gifts
.
Sounds True, Inc.
Boulder, CO 80306
© 2012 by Marshall B. Rosenberg
 
SOUNDS TRUE is a trademark of Sounds
True, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any
manner without written permission from the author and publisher.
Cover design by Jennifer MilesBook design by Beth Skelley
Printed in Canada
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 
Rosenberg, Marshall B.
Living nonviolent communication : practical tools to connect and communicate
skillfully in every situation / Marshall B. Rosenberg.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-1-60407-787-2
1. Interpersonal communication. 2. Interpersonal conflict. 3. Conflict
management. I. Title.
BF637.C45R644 2012
153.6—dc23
2011044907eBook ISBN: 978-1-60407-827-5